EXPLORING HOW FAIR MODEL REPRESENTATIONS RELATE TO
FAIR RECOMMENDATIONS
Bjørnar Vassøy, Benjamin Kille, Helge Langseth
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Trondheim, Norway
bjonar.vassoy@ntnu.no
ABSTRACT
One of the many fairness definitions pursued in recent recommender system research targets mitigating
demographic information encoded in model representations. Models optimized for this definition are
typically evaluated on how well demographic attributes can be classified given model representations,
with the (implicit) assumption that this measure accurately reflects recommendation parity, i.e., how
similar recommendations given to different users are. We challenge this assumption by comparing
the amount of demographic information encoded in representations with various measures of how
the recommendations differ. We propose two new approaches for measuring how well demographic
information can be classified given ranked recommendations. Our results from extensive testing of
multiple models on one real and multiple synthetically generated datasets indicate that optimizing
for fair representations positively affects recommendation parity, but also that evaluation at the
representation level is not a good proxy for measuring this effect when comparing models. We also
provide extensive insight into how recommendation-level fairness metrics behave for various models
by evaluating their performances on numerous generated datasets with different properties.
Keywords Recommender Systems, Fairness, Fairness Evaluation
1
Introduction
Fairness does not have a definition shared throughout the academic community. Different definitions can often be
exemplified in whether one believes the data to be accurate or biased. For instance, in a career recommender dataset,
one may argue that the data is biased and that different demographic groups have more similar preferences than the data
indicates, e.g., many historically gendered occupations are more balanced today. In other domains where demographic
preference differences have remained more static, it may be more fitting to trust the data and rather make sure that
the recommendation system performs equally well for each group. This paper focuses on a definition that falls under
the former example, neutral representation [1], and from here onwards any use of fair or fairness will refer to this
definition.
Neutral representation is a fairness objective that focuses on mitigating the encoding of user demographics in model
representations. This fairness definition focuses on users rather than items/providers, and would be categorized as
consumer-side fairness (C-fairness) in the taxonomy proposed in [2]. Its motivation is that if a model representation
does not correlate with the user’s demographics, the demographics do not influence the model’s treatment of said
user. Models optimized for providing users recommendations that do not correlate with their demographics fall under
methods optimized for recommendation parity in the consumer-side fairness taxonomy proposed in [1]. While perfect
optmization of neutral representation fairness theoretically should lead to perfect recommendation parity, we are
unaware of any extensive research into how the two fairness objectives and their associated metrics relate for different
models, levels of optmization, and different dataset properties. Further, while there are well-established metrics for
measuring how different recommendation sets are for rating-prediction recommendation [3, 4, 5, 6] where the models
predict how each user will rate every item, it is considerably harder to measure similar properties for models that output
ranked top-k recommendations. A metric for comparing such sets of recommendations must decide how to handle
ranking, disjoint sets of items, and potential aggregation of items for user groups, and it should ideally be interpretable.
arXiv:2603.24396v1  [cs.IR]  25 Mar 2026
Exploring How Fair Model Representations Relate to Fair Recommendations
A few metrics have been proposed, but, unlike the evaluation of neutral representation, there are no go-to metrics
for evaluating recommendation parity of top-k recommendations. Our work explores how various models perform in
both the standard neutral representation metric and recommendation parity metrics for different hyperparameters on
different datasets. We also look into classifying users’ demographics given their recommendations, similar to how
neutral representations are evaluated. In particular, we are interested in gaining insights into the following questions:
• Are neutrality estimates of model representations good proxies for how much user demographics influence
recommendations?
• Are neural classifiers apt for estimating how much user demographics influence top-k recommendations?
• How do metrics for comparing sets of ranked recommendations behave for different models and dataset
properties?
2
Background
Models optimized for neutral representation are usually evaluated by estimating how well classifiers can be trained
to identify demographic classes given model Representations. The success of said classifiers is often measured by
Area Under the ROC-Curve (AUC), which is defined as the area under the curve defined by the True Positive Rate
and False Positive Rate for each classification threshold. AUC is preferred over metrics such as accuracy since it also
accounts for False Negatives, and considers all threshold values without requiring the specification of one for each
trained model. Successful classifiers have thresholds for which True Positive Rate > False Positive Rate, which results
in AUC > 0.5, with 1.0 being optimal. For neutral representation, we want the classifier to fail since this implies that the
representations no longer encode demographics, at which point its performance matches that of a random classifier with
AUC = 0.5. Note that binary classifiers that achieve AUC < 0.5 can have their class probability inverted to achieve AUC
> 0.5, and AUC = x is usually considered equivalent to 1 −x.
Among the different types of recommender systems, we focus on models that provide users with top-k ranked lists
of the items predicted to be the most relevant for each user. The data used for training our models consists of user
interactions, typically interaction types that indicate the user has an interest in the item. Similar to most research into
this recommendation setting, we do not allow the recommendation of items the user has already interacted with.
3
Related Work
Many recommender systems are optimized for neutral representation and evaluated by training classifiers to identify
demographic classes based on model representations. Among the first models are [7] and [8]. The former proposes to
directly train adversarial classifiers to predict demographics given user latent factors in a matrix factorization model and
use gradients from these classifiers to update the latent factors to better fool said classifiers. The latter instead proposes
to train filter networks for filtering out individual demographic features from representations, again using adversarial
classifiers. This model allows users to specify which demographic features to filter out. User control is also supported
by [9] and [10], which interface with pre-trained models to offer optional fairness consideration. The authors of [9]
apply information theory and adversarial classifiers to split representations of an underlying model into one neutral and
several demographic-specific representations. A second part of the approach comprises a network trained to re-combine
the neutral representation and the allowed demographic representations, such that the final representation can be used
in the underlying model. The authors of [10] instead train classifiers to identify how the input can be perturbed to
obfuscate the demographic information encoded in Variational Autoencoder (VAE) latent representations, which is
applied iteratively by adding and removing items. This approach also provides the user transparency into how their
input has been changed to hide their demographics and how this changes their recommendations.
The methods proposed in [11] are optimized for neutral representation without using adversarial classifiers. Specifically,
the authors fit probabilistic methods with priors informative of user demographics to encourage the other parts of the
models to focus on non-demographic aspects. During evaluation, they replace the informative priors with neutral
ones. The authors of [1] provide a detailed overview of recommender systems optimized for neutral representation and
methods evaluated by training auxiliary classifiers to classify demographics given model representations.
The work presented in [12] is similar to our work in thoroughly exploring the behaviour of fairness-related metrics
for different dataset properties. They focus on provider-side fairness (P-fairness) [2] and metrics that jointly evaluate
recommendation performance and item exposure/envy. The paper, like ours, concludes with suggestions for using
the considered metrics and notes on the strengths and weaknesses of the metrics based on the presented results and
observations.
2
Exploring How Fair Model Representations Relate to Fair Recommendations
The related works we have highlighted either propose models optimized for neutral representation fairness, or explore
fairness evaluation in depth. Our work partly combines the two by thoroughly exploring how such models and their
optimization relate to fairness evaluation of output rather than model representation.
4
Method
We propose two methods for estimating how much demographics have influenced recommendations and apply existing
methods for generating synthetic datasets to explore how the models and metrics perform for different data properties.
4.1
Recommendation AUC
As an alternative to measuring how much the model representations reveal about a user’s demographic features, we
want to measure the same given ranked sequences of recommendations. This is a challenging task given how sparse
recommendation data is, the (often) large number of items, and how item popularity typically follows a Power-Law
distribution [13]. Most items will only account for a few entries in the dataset and will only be observed along a small
set of the total number of items in the recommendation lists in which they appear. This causes a lot of uncertainty for
data-driven models, as it is difficult to know how rare these relations are.
4.1.1
Neural AUC
A neural classifier is prone to learn spurious correlations of rare items. To mitigate this issue, we first train item
embeddings using a Skip-Gram approach. Specifically, for each item liked by a user, we sample up to five neighbour
items among other items liked by the user, and train a neural embedding network to maximize the predicted probability
of the neighbour items given the input item. Unlike in other embedding settings, our training data does not have
sequence information, so neighbours are sampled among all items liked by the same user. The embedding layer of this
network is then extracted for the recommendation classifiers. This mitigates overfitting by having the embedding layer
constrained by what the embedding model encoded, and limits the recommendation classifiers’ abilities to push rare
and demographically polarized items to extreme points in the embedding space. In other words, the recommendation
classifier has to work with the more general learned features to separate the cases it is presented with.
Multiple settings and architectures were tested for the sequence model: whether to use pre-trained embeddings,
feedforward- vs RNN- vs Transformer-encoder-based layers, and whether to add information on how demographically
polarized each item is in the training data. Our tests showed that generalization improved when enabling pre-trained
embeddings using the described Skip-gram approach. RNN and Transformer-encoder-based models outperformed
the feedforward model, but we observed negligible difference between the two. Preliminary testing did not reveal
noticeable improvement from including information on how demographically polarized each item is, but we opted for
keeping it based on how well this information is used in the alternative Recommendation AUC measure.
Note on different training/evaluation strategies
The Representation AUC evaluated in the VAE-based models
we compare was measured using Logistic regression models trained exclusively on testing data and evaluated using
cross entropy. The recommendation classifiers used to measure Neural AUC are trained on the training data and
only evaluated on the testing data. The former may be more accurate in scenarios where training representations
and testing representations follow different distributions, i.e., poor generalization, but may suffer from high variance
in smaller datasets since the validation part is small. The latter has more training data, but will be inaccurate if the
model is overfitted. We concluded that this training/evaluation difference was warranted for the following reasons: We
verified that both approaches yield insignificant differences in expected values for both types of AUC. Further, since the
recommendation classifiers require way more computation to train, it would be very demanding to train them enough
times to counteract the high variance of the former strategy.
4.1.2
Demographic Ratio AUC
As a simple alternative to the Neural network-based Recommendation AUC, we use the median demographic ratio of
the items in the recommendation list. An item’s demographic ratio is defined as the number of times the minority user
group has interacted with the item, divided by the total number of interactions with said item. For items preferred by one
user group, the resulting ratio differs from the ratio of minority users in the dataset. We use the median demographic
ratio of the items recommended to a user as a predictor for their demographics and calculate AUC as usual.
DemographicRatioi =
P 1{du,i ∈D ∧u ∈Uminority}
P 1{du′,i ∈D ∧u′ ∈U}
(1)
3
Exploring How Fair Model Representations Relate to Fair Recommendations
Here, du,i indicates that user u has interacted with item i, D is the set of all interactions, U is the set of users, and
Uminority is the set of users belonging to the smallest demographic group.
4.2
Dataset Generation
The synthetic datasets were generated by the approach proposed in [14]. The generation process can be summarized by
the following equations:
popi ∼LongTail(λ)
(2)
ˆdu,i ∼Bernoulli(tδ(1−pdf(popi))
u,i
)
(3)
where LongTail can be any long-tail distribution (Power-Law, Stretched Exponential, Log-Normal etc) with parameters
λ and density function pdf. Further, popi is item i’s popularity score, δ is a control parameter for item popularity and
ˆdu,i indicates that item i is a candidate item of user u. The variable tu,i represents the underlying utility of item i for
user u and is defined as a factorization of latent Dirichlet variables. The dimensions of the latent variables represent
item features and allow the specification of item and user categories. The different categories are related to features
through Dirichlet priors, while features not associated with the category are given prior parameters of ϵ, which serves as
a hyperparameter.
A user’s data is sampled from the candidate items ˆdu,i since the Bernoulli sampling of the candidate items will typically
lead to the number of candidates per user being normally distributed. The second sampling instead enforces this number
to follow a LongTail distribution as in many real dataset. The sampling is done as follows:
n′
u ∼LongTail(β)
nu = n′
u + τ
(4)
Du = {ij|ij ∼Uniform( ˆDu), j = 1, ..., nu}
(5)
where nu is the number of interactions for user u, τ is a minimum number of interactions and Du is final set of item
interaction of user u in the synthetic dataset.
We used Log-Normals for both LongTail distributions and found realistic values for the parameters λ and β by fitting
Log-Normals to the number of interactions per item and the number of interactions per user in the Movielens 1 Million
dataset [15].
5
Experimental Setting
Our experiments are run on the Movielens 1 Million dataset [15] and synthetically generated datasets. The Movielens
dataset contains roughly 6k users, 3.5k items, and we extract binary demographic attributes for Gender and Age for
all users. The minority Gender group makes up 28.3% of the users, while the same number is 23.6% for Age. The
training-test split was performed such that each user is only represented in one dataset, as the considered models are
designed to recommend any user when given their user data. We selected k = 40 for the number of recommendations
considered in each metric since we hypothesized that typical values like 10 would reflect very little demographic
influence for fairness optimized methods. Later testing of this hypothesis revealed smaller differences than anticipated,
but we opted to keep k = 40 because it yielded results with smaller variance. Our code is publicly available1.
5.1
Models
We utilized existing implementations from [10] for all VAE-based models. For implementation details, please refer
to this paper and its accompanying code. We performed hyperparameter searches to determine the optimal hyperpa-
rameters for the models in the Movielens dataset, as well as to identify viable parameters when varying the degree
of fairness weighting in specific tests. For experiments using synthetic datasets, we only considered models without
hyperparameters or models that are insensitive to hyperparameter choices.
5.1.1
POP
This model is the popularity baseline. Each user is recommended the k most popular items among the items the user
has not already interacted with. POP is fair since it applies the same heuristic for each user regardless of demographics.
1https://github.com/BjornarVass/fair_rec_eval
4
Exploring How Fair Model Representations Relate to Fair Recommendations
5.1.2
Rand
This model is the random baseline. Each user is given a random list of recommendations among the items the user has
not liked. RAND’s heuristic is fair.
5.1.3
Dem.
POP
This model is a popularity baseline on a demographic level. Users of a demographic group are given recommendations
based on the most popular items among their demographic group. Dem.
POP is designed to be discriminatory.
5.1.4
Max Division
This model is a baseline that recommends the most demographically divisive items to the demographic groups that
prefer them. Items that occur fewer than five times in the training set are excluded. Max Division is designed to be
discriminatory.
5.1.5
VAE
The VAE [16] model is a popular VAE-based recommender system. Trained as a Noisy-VAE to reconstruct lists of
items interacted with by the user. Recommendations are extracted from the noisy reconstruction based on probabilities
assigned to items the user has not liked. VAE is not optimized for fairness.
5.1.6
VAERel and VAE2Adv
The VAERel and VAE2Adv models [10] are both fair extensions of VAE that iteratively perturb the user input to obfuscate
demographic information. Perturbations are identified by training classifiers to classify demographics given the VAE
latent representation and propagating neural gradients to the inputs where they inform which additions/removals would
best obfuscate. Both methods are given a budget that indicates the maximum number of items that can be perturbed, but
VAE2Adv differs in training a second group of classifiers to take over after, at most, half of the budget has been spent.
VAE2Adv typically improves fairness further since the first group of adversarials may focus on items that overshadow
other items through strong correlations, while the second group can learn weaker correlations after the former has been
dealt with. Both are trivial to tune for any dataset properties.
5.1.7
VAEAfrl*
The VAEAfrl* model is another fair extension of VAE based on [9]. The model alternates between training adversarial
classifiers to classify demographics given a filtered VAE latent state and the filtering network to fool the adversarials,
i.e., generative adversarial networks (GANs). A second part is trained to combine the filtered representation with
(extracted) demographic information based on the user’s permission. The combined representation is used with the
underlying recommender system. Further details on how the approach proposed in [9] was adapted for VAE and a
different evaluation setting are found in [10].
5.2
Metrics
5.2.1
Item ratio
Item ratio is proposed in [10] as a simple, intuitive metric for measuring how far the recommendations are from the ideal
case where each item is equally likely to be recommended for each demographic group. The metric relies on measures
for each items similar to Demographic Ratio (Eq 1), only differing in counting item occurrences in the training data
rather than the recommendations. For each item, it calculates the absolute difference of this measure and the ratio of
minority users in the dataset, and aggregates the items by mean. Each item will contribute 0 in a fair scenario since the
ratios match. The main drawback of this metric is related to fraction precision, i.e., the best possible ratio of an item
with few recommendations may be far from the minority ratio. This issue is exacerbated for minority ratios that require
large numbers of observations to approximate accurately.
5.2.2
Kendall-Tau
Kendall-Tau is an established metric for comparing lists containing the same set of items. We consider an extension2 of
the metric for the recommendation setting, where top-k recommendations often contain different sets of items. The
2https://xebia.com/blog/using-kendalls-tau-to-compare-recommendations/
5
Exploring How Fair Model Representations Relate to Fair Recommendations
Figure 1: Recommendation AUC plotted against Representation AUC for synthetic datasets with different ϵ parameters.
VAE and VAERel.
extended metric is 1 for identical lists, and -1 for lists with disjoint sets of items. We aggregate recommendations for
each demographic group by counting the occurrences of each item in the users’ top-k recommendations and ranking the
items by occurrences. The top-k items among these aggregations are then compared.
6
Results
The default synthetic data is generated with 4000 users, 4000 items, and the minority demographic group accounts
for 30% of the users. We based these settings on the movielens dataset, and opted for numbers well suited for mental
arithmetics. Each experiment specifies any changes to these values in text or plotted axes. The VAE-based models are
all trained at least 5 times for each set of hyperparameters, and we use early-stopping to train the models for varying
dataset properties and settings. Tests that vary dataset hyperparameters generate at least five datasets for each set of
parameters.
6.1
Comparing Representation and Recommendation AUC
We explore two approaches for comparing Recommendation AUC and Representation AUC: The first approach keeps
model hyperparameters static while generating synthetic datasets for different ϵ settings, i.e., varying how much the
preferences of the two demographic groups overlap/diverge. In the second approach, the dataset is kept static and
we train multiple versions of each model while varying hyperparameters controlling the importance of the fairness
objectives.
6.1.1
Static Models, Different Datasets
We generated 50 datasets for each ϵ value between 0.02 and 1.00 with 0.02-sized intervals. Figure 1 reveal three key
insights:
1. For Representation AUC higher than 0.65, VAE and VAERel indicate a roughly linear relation between Neural
and Representation AUC. For lower Representation AUC, the slopes flatten, and the Neural classifier fails to
pick up noticeable differences between the recommendation lists of different demographic groups.
2. For both Recommendation AUC metrics, the plots reveal that the fair model VAERel can achieve lower
Recommendation AUC over a substantial Representation AUC interval. This implies that the fair models and
their active minimization of Representation AUC are more efficient at reducing Recommendation AUC than
the passive removal of information by increasing dataset ϵ. Reducing Representation AUC by 0.1 through
6
Exploring How Fair Model Representations Relate to Fair Recommendations
Figure 2: Gender and Age Recommendation AUC plotted against Representation AUC for the Movielens 1M datasets
with different model parameters. VAERel and VAEAfrl*.
Figure 3: Gender and Age Recommendation AUC plotted against Representation AUC for the Movielens 1M datasets
with different model parameters. VAE2adv and VAEAfrl*.
7
Exploring How Fair Model Representations Relate to Fair Recommendations
Figure 4: Recommendation AUC plotted against Representation AUC in a synthetic dataset with ϵ = 0.74 parameters.
switching from VAE to VAERel results in a greater reduction of Recommendation AUC than the same reduction
of Representation AUC through increasing ϵ without switching the model.
3. The Demographic Ratio AUC of VAE has an almost perfectly linear relationship with Representation AUC, i.e.,
the non-fair baseline will encode and output most of the demographic differences in the generated dataset.
6.1.2
Different Models, Static Dataset
In the Movielens dataset, we consider two demographic features: Gender and Age (Figure 2). The two fair models
VAERel and VAEAfrl* are combined in the same plot to cover more of the AUC ranges and to highlight potential
differences in how their optimization performs for different types of AUC.
• For both Gender and Age, Recommendation AUC trend towards 0.5 for Representation AUC around 0.6, i.e.,
recommendations may become fair while the representations still reveal demographics.
• Neural AUC varies more and is typically lower than Demographic Ratio AUC for smaller Representation AUC
values, in particular for Gender.
• The relation between Neural AUC and Demographic Ratio AUC is flipped for large Representation AUC and
different models. This seems to be both model and dataset-dependent (Figures 3, 4 and 6).
If VAERel is replaced with the more fair VAE2adv, as seen in Figure 3, it becomes clear that the two different fairness
approaches do not have overlapping curves for the same Representation AUC. In other words, different approaches for
minimizing Representation AUC can have different impacts on Recommendation AUC.
A final comparison of Representation and Recommendation AUC when training VAERel and VAEAfrl* with different
hyperparameters is shown in Figure 4. Here, we look at synthetic datasets with ϵ = 0.74 to see how the same comparison
looks when the demographic preferences differ substantially less than in the Movielens dataset. Key differences are
that Neural AUC is lower than Demographic Ratio AUC for the full Representation AUC interval and both models.
While the variance is greater and Representation AUC ranges are mostly disjoint, the plot indicates that VAERel achieve
similar Recommendation AUC as VAEAfrl* but at ≈0.04 worse Representation AUC. This is the opposite of the
Movielens results, i.e., one method appears more efficient than the other in a dataset with large demographic differences,
but less efficient in datasets with smaller demographic differences. For these datasets, none of the models get close to
0.5 Demographic Ratio AUC, and the slopes are flatter than for Movielens
8
Exploring How Fair Model Representations Relate to Fair Recommendations
Figure 5: Recommendation metrics plotted for different models and dataset ϵ-parameters.
6.2
Model Behaviour for Different Datasets
In this section, we compare models for different metrics while varying dataset parameters. We explore the effect of
varying how different the demographic groups are, the number of users in the dataset, and how skewed the demographic
groups are. Unlike previous sections, we also compare the VAE-based methods with other baselines. Unfortunately,
VAEAfrl* proved difficult to tune for these experiments as the GAN setup is highly sensitive to dataset properties and
hyperparameters. The only fair VAE-based model considered in this Section is VAERel.
6.2.1
Varying ϵ
The hyperparameter ϵ functionally defines how similar the preferences of different demographic groups are, where
ϵ = 0 results in disjoint preferences and ϵ = 1 in overlapping preferences. The results are shown in Figure 5, and we
structure observations by model.
POP
The popularity baseline is a bit more unstable than other models since it is heavily impacted by how the most
popular items are distributed over items preferred by different demographic groups, especially because the groups
9
Exploring How Fair Model Representations Relate to Fair Recommendations
Figure 6: Comparison of VAE andVAERel Demographic Ratio AUC plotted for each dataset ϵ-parameters.
have skewed sizes. For small ϵ, the different groups like no or few overlapping items, the majority class tend to
dominate the popular items, and both types of Recommendation AUC are high. Interestingly, mid-valued ϵ results in
Demographic Ratio AUCs lower than 0.5. Here, the preferences have started to overlap, and popular items skewed
towards one class may appear more often in recommendations given to the other class. This is because many of the
users in the group that prefer the item have already interacted with it and will not be recommended the item. So,
the fact that we do not recommend items to users who have already interacted with an item results in the Popularity
baseline outputting different distributions of recommendations for different demographic groups, despite the general
heuristic being fair. Neural AUC appears to capture the pattern and maximize the output probabilities of the correct
class, thus, AUC is greater than 0.5. The model’s Item ratio and Kendall-Tau performance get better for larger ϵ and is
also the best-performing model for these metrics and datasets. The great number of recommendations of the same items
minimizes the precision issue of Item ratio, and the fair heuristic results in similar items in the top recommendations.
RAND
The random baseline performs very consistently for different metrics and different ϵ values. Neural and
Demographic Ratio AUC indicate that this model also produces slightly different recommendations for small ϵ, i.e., the
recommended lists will differ somewhat since the items the users have interacted with are excluded from the random
sample. The random sample consistently results in aggregated group recommendations with disjoint sets of items,
giving the worst Kendall-Tau value of -1. Finally, this model is expected to recommend an item equally to all users, but
by distributing the recommendations to all items, each item will only appear a few times. The former is good for the
Item ratio metric while the latter can decrease performance, resulting in RAND being outperformed by POP for most ϵ
values and by both VAE-based models for larger values.
Dem.
POP and Max Division
The two models designed to be discriminatory share many similarities. Both
perfectly reflect the users’ demographics for all but the largest ϵ, but are very unstable for datasets where preferences
mostly overlap. The latter is because the selection of popular items among each group, and the items that are the most
divisive, becomes arbitrary once preferences mostly overlap. While Dem.
POP achieves a Kendall-Tau of greater than
0 and improved Item ratio for ϵ close to 1, Max Division achieves the worst possible Kendall-Tau and worst observed
Item ratio across all ϵ.
VAE and VAERel
The VAE models are best discussed together as the latter is a fair extension of the former. As
expected, VAERel outperforms VAE on all metrics, but their performance mostly overlap for very large ϵ. As seen in
other experiments, Neural AUC is reduced to the perfect 0.5 for datasets where the preferences of the demographic
groups overlap. This is also the case for Demographic Ratio AUC at very large ϵ. Finally, when comparing the two types
of Recommendation AUC of both VAE-based models in Figure 6, we see that both models have a higher Demographic
Ratio AUC for larger ϵ, but VAERel’s Neural AUC is higher for smaller ϵ (VAE achieves AUCs of 1 for most of this area
so they cannot be compared). This corroborates results in Figure 2.
10
Exploring How Fair Model Representations Relate to Fair Recommendations
Figure 7: Recommendation metrics plotted for different models and number of users in dataset.
6.2.2
Varying Number of Users
Ideally, the metrics should all be very consistent when varying the number of users, as the demographic properties of
the datasets do not change. Our results are found in Figure 7, and we structure the observation and discussion by metric.
Most trends are shared by all models, and there are only a few surprising results for each metric.
Neural AUC
All models see a bump in AUC when increasing the number of users from 500 to 1000, likely because
the amount of training data limited the performance in the smallest datasets. POP has a surprising drop for 3000 users,
and is hypothesised to be related to the previously noted instability of this model, coupled with the relatively small
number of users. Finally, VAERel appears to achieve a slightly worse AUC score on datasets with more users which
is also seen in its Item ratio performance. This is perhaps related to the model relying on adversarial classifiers to
introduce fairness, and the increased number of users impacts their training. However, similar trends are not seen for
Demographic Ratio AUC and Kendall-Tau.
11
Exploring How Fair Model Representations Relate to Fair Recommendations
Figure 8: Recommendation metrics plotted for different models and dataset minority ratio.
Demographic Ratio AUC
Most models are fairly consistent here, with minor fluctuations for smaller numbers of
users. As observed and discussed in Section 6.2.1, the Demographic Ratio AUC measured for POP is substantially
below 0.5.
Item ratio
It is apparent that increasing the number of users improves the Item ratio achieved by RAND. This is not
surprising given the discussed precision issue related to this metric, i.e., with more observations of each item, the best
recommendation ratio(s) will be closer to the demographic ratio of the dataset and incur smaller penalties.
Kendall-Tau
The Kendall-Tau metric is also fairly consistent for all models, but it is worth noting that VAERel
roughly fluctuates around the same value while VAE is slowly deteriorating.
6.2.3
Varying Demographic Split
The final suite of tests shown in Figure 8 compares metrics while varying the relative size of the smallest demographic
group (minority ratio).
12
Exploring How Fair Model Representations Relate to Fair Recommendations
POP
The popularity baseline displays some unexpected behaviour for Neural AUC. As for other models, the neural
model struggles to learn anything for very skewed demographic groups. However, the popularity baselines achieve well
below 0.5 AUC for smaller minority ratios before jumping to levels more comparable with the VAE-based models. The
leading hypothesis is that the neural models struggle to deal with the long-tail popularity distribution and how the few
most popular items are distributed among items preferred by the different groups. Instability/fluctuation is also clear
in its Demographic Ratio AUC, but to a lesser degree, and shows a clear deteriorating trend. As seen in other plots,
POP’s Demographic Ratio AUC stays under 0.5 and worsens by moving further away from 0.5. Finally, despite these
trends and fluctuations, Kendall-Tau remains largely consistent for all but the smallest minority ratios, and the Item
ratio follows similar curves as the other models.
RAND
Consistent across all metrics.
Dem.
POP and Max Division
Consistently performs the worst for all metrics. Max Division either overlaps
with Dem.
POP or performs slightly worse.
VAE and VAERel
VAERel performs better than VAE for all minority ratios on all metrics. Both models indicate that
the models used for estimating Neural AUC struggle for minority ratios smaller than 0.225 as the plots show substantial
fluctuation that starts at AUC of about 0.5. At greater ratios, both curves appear mostly flat. Their Demographic Ratio
AUC starts off at roughly the same value for low minority ratios, but settles into more stable values at roughly the same
ratio threshold, with VAE worsening and VAERel improving. This is very similar to their behaviour for both Item ratio
and Kendall-Tau, with the caveat that all models worsen in Item Ratio as minority ratio increases, but VAE worsens at a
noticeably higher rate than VAERel.
Note on Item ratio
The Item ratio of all models worsens the larger the minority ratio, which is largely explained by
the following observations: The smaller the minority ratio, the less the item ratios of 0 (none of the minority class were
recommended the item) differ from the minority ratio. Further, fewer items preferred by the minority class will make
the minimum requirement for being considered in the metric because they are not recommended to enough users, and
items preferred by the majority will make up the majority of considered items.
7
Discussion
7.1
Representation AUC Larger Than Recommendation AUC
Representation AUC will always be an upper bound of Recommendation AUC, and there are many potential expla-
nations for Recommendation AUCs being substantially smaller. We have shown that our implementation of Neural
(Recommendation) AUC performs worse than the simple Demographic Ratio AUC when demographic groups have
similar preferences, but better when their preferences differ more, e.g., Figure 6. In theory, the neural classifier should
be equipped to learn the same predictor since it is given the Demographic Ratios as input, but in practice, we see that
this fails. This was further supported by toy examples where we explicitly trained classifiers in scenarios where taking
the mean of the ratio features would result in AUC of about 0.6, and where we also added noisy dimensions for each
item to simulate the item embeddings it could ignore to match Demographic Ratio AUC. Note that one typically does
not train classifiers in such settings since the best possible classifiers would only perform slightly better than random
choices. The neural models were very sensitive to the added noise and routinely failed to achieve AUC greater than 0.5
for recommendation/item lists of 10 or more items and a few dimensions of noise for each item.
While we believe it would be challenging to design and train neural classifiers that would outperform both of our
approaches across all/smaller Representation AUC, we cannot exclude the possibility that an ideal classifier may be
able to match Recommendation AUC with the Representation AUC for some models. However, it is worth noting
that a classifier may pick up minor differences in the representation space despite not affecting the output rankings.
In theory, representations that produce two identical sets of recommendations may be fully separable, e.g., least
significant bit encoding. Figures 1, 3, 4 etc, all reveal that the same Representation AUC can be associated with
different Recommendation AUC for different models, i.e., the same Representation AUC can lead to various levels of
demographic differences in the output. This implies that not all the demographic knowledge in the representation is
propagated to the output for at least one of the models. Finally, since we are looking at a limited part of the output (top
40 recommendations), unmeasured demographic differences may be found in the excluded part of the output.
13
Exploring How Fair Model Representations Relate to Fair Recommendations
7.2
Which Recommendation/Representation AUC Measure To Trust?
We have shown that different approaches for calculating Recommendation AUC can produce different values. We
argue that one should trust the method that produced the best (average) AUC value, regardless of the model complexity.
In practice, we often see that neural models can overfit and return a lower AUC value than Logistic Regression or
Demographic Ratio AUC. The latter two methods cannot capture correlations that are not linearly separable, but this is
of little importance if they outperform models that are.
Despite this conclusion, we have presented two different measures of Recommendation AUC throughout this paper.
This is because we want to properly explore how the two proposed measures differ for various models and datasets, and
to highlight further the challenges of accurately measuring Recommendation AUC. If we aggregated a single value
through max, it would be more difficult to analyze why models or datasets result in specific trends in Recommendation
AUC.
7.3
Optimal Representation AUC in other Research?
Some existing research achieved optimal AUC for datasets like Movielens, while our best model achieved around 0.6
AUC for both Gender and Age. Our experience is that all of these claims have the following explanations:
1. In most evaluation scenarios, the model will only recommend for users present in the training data. These
models can perfectly learn all user-demographic correlations and filter these out. This is a valid strategy for
these evaluation scenarios, but it does not generalize to new users and will remove all spurious correlations of
demographics and users. Known users’ demographics are perfectly filtered, so the model will achieve AUC =
0.5 for these users.
2. If the classifier used to measure AUC is severely overfitted to the training data, it may treat unseen representa-
tions randomly, which results in an AUC of 0.5 for these users.
In our evaluation setup, we exclusively test on new users not present in the training set, so all aspects of the evaluated
models must generalize to new input.
8
Conclusion
Our results show that optimising for neutral representations makes the treatment of different demographic groups more
similar, but raises questions about evaluating these methods by Representation AUC. Firstly, in both real and synthetic
datasets with demographic differences, we have shown that the Recommendation AUC trend towards perfect while
Representation AUC still indicate that the Representations encode demographics. At perfect Recommendation AUC,
further optimization of Representation AUC will not positively affect recommendation parity, and the likely worsening
of recommendation performance will be for nothing. Secondly, two models achieving the same Representation AUC
have been shown to achieve substantially different Item ratio, Kendall-Tau and Recommendation AUC. We have also
observed that fair models optimized for datasets with different levels of demographic information will achieve the same
Recommendation AUCs as non-fair models, but for larger Representation AUCs. Finally, we have highlighted some
issues with the AUC metrics, namely, how they easily overfit, how the same value can have multiple explanations, and
how different approaches for calculating this metric are more accurate for different levels of demographic information.
Even if all of these issues are handled in the best way possible, our findings indicate that Representation AUC at
best serves as an upper limit of how much demographics can influence the recommendations, without capturing
that different models with the same upper limit can express different levels of demographic information in their
recommendations. Thus, we suggest limiting the usage of the Representation AUC when evaluating models optimized
for neutral representations. If it is used, it should be used together with metrics that also compare the model’s output.
Our results also shed light on how fair heuristics like Popularity and Random baselines are deemed fair and discrim-
inatory by different fairness metrics. RAND performs very well on Recommendation AUC, good on Item ratio, but
achieves the worst possible Kendall-Tau score. POP performs very well on Item ratio and Kendall-Tau, but not on
Recommendation AUC. Further, certain experiments illustrate an issue with evaluating such heuristics in recommender
systems that do not allow repeated recommendations, since the heuristic becomes conditioned on the known user data.
The conditioned heuristics will not behave fairly unless the known data is unbiased by demographics. If an item is more
popular among one group, a method poised to recommend it equally for all groups may recommend it more often to the
other group in which fewer users have interacted with it in the training data. While these observations are only made for
these simple baselines, they are equally valid for a (theoretical) perfectly fair recommender system that completely
disregards demographics. A perfectly fair heuristic will not achieve the perfect metric score for all of our considered
metrics since the (input) data-conditional recommendations will correlate with demographics whenever the input data
14
Exploring How Fair Model Representations Relate to Fair Recommendations
Figure 9: Item Ratio and Kendall-Tau plotted against Representation AUC. Comparison of VAE and VAERel on synthetic
datasets with different ϵ parameters.
does. How models behave for different metrics as they close in on being perfectly fair remains an open question. For
example, will the item ratio move towards zero before increasing again as it gets fairer, or will it monotonically decrease
without visiting zero? Answering these questions will be pivotal should perfectly fair recommender systems ever be
proposed.
Finally, we have explored metrics for evaluating how different the recommendations given to different demographic
groups are and how they behave for different datasets and model parameters. We have proposed two methods for
measuring Recommendation AUC and thoroughly compared them and how they relate to Representation AUC. Our
extensive experiments highlight the strengths and weaknesses of existing and new metrics.
Acknowledgments
This publication has been partly funded by the SFI NorwAI, (Centre for Research-based Innovation, 309834). The
authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Research Council of Norway and the partners of the SFI
NorwAI.
A
Additional Results
Figure 9 reinforces that the Representation AUC is not a good proxy for recommendation fairness since different models
achieve the same Representation AUC for different Item ratios and Kendall-Tau values. The plot also shows how both
metrics have an exponential relationship with Representation AUC.
We provide three plots similar to Figure 5, where we compare both measures of Recommendation AUC of VAE and
VAERel for three different synthetic datasets. The plots have the same scale and decreasing levels of demographic
preferences overlap.
References
[1] Bjørnar Vassøy and Helge Langseth. Consumer-side fairness in recommender systems: a systematic survey of
methods and evaluation. Artificial Intelligence Review, 57(4):101, Mar 2024.
[2] Robin Burke, Nasim Sonboli, and Aldo Ordonez-Gauger. Balanced neighborhoods for multi-sided fairness
in recommendation. In Sorelle A. Friedler and Christo Wilson, editors, Proceedings of the 1st Conference on
15
Exploring How Fair Model Representations Relate to Fair Recommendations
Figure 10: Recommendation AUC plotted against Representation AUC in synthetic datasets with three different ϵ
parameters.
Fairness, Accountability and Transparency, volume 81 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
202–214. PMLR, 23–24 Feb 2018.
[3] Sirui Yao and Bert Huang. Beyond parity: Fairness objectives for collaborative filtering. In I. Guyon, U. Von
Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
[4] Ashwathy Ashokan and Christian Haas. Fairness metrics and bias mitigation strategies for rating predictions.
Information Processing & Management, 58(5):102646, 2021.
[5] Toshihiro Kamishima, Shotaro Akaho, Hideki Asoh, and Jun Sakuma.
Enhancement of the Neutrality in
Recommendation. In Marco de Gemmis, Alexander Felfernig, Pasquale Lops, Francesco Ricci, Giovanni
Semeraro, and Martijn C. Willemsen, editors, Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Human Decision Making in
Recommender Systems, Dublin, Ireland, September 9, 2012, volume 893 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings, pages
8–14. CEUR-WS.org, 2012.
[6] Toshihiro Kamishima, Shotaro Akaho, Hideki Asoh, and Issei Sato. Model-Based Approaches for Independence-
Enhanced Recommendation. In 2016 IEEE 16th International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW),
pages 860–867, Barcelona, Spain, December 2016. IEEE.
[7] Yehezkel S. Resheff, Yanai Elazar, Moni Shahar, and Oren Sar Shalom. Privacy and fairness in recommender
systems via adversarial training of user representations. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Pattern Recognition Applications and Methods - ICPRAM, pages 476–482. INSTICC, SciTePress, 2019.
[8] Avishek Bose and William Hamilton. Compositional fairness constraints for graph embeddings. In Kamalika
Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov, editors, Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 715–724. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.
[9] Xinyu Zhu, Lilin Zhang, and Ning Yang. Adaptive fair representation learning for personalized fairness in
recommendations via information alignment. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’24, page 427–436, New York, NY, USA, 2024.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[10] Bjørnar Vassøy, Benjamin Kille, and Helge Langseth. Opt-in transparent fairness for recommender systems. In
Claudia Hauff, Craig Macdonald, Dietmar Jannach, Gabriella Kazai, Franco Maria Nardini, Fabio Pinelli, Fabrizio
Silvestri, and Nicola Tonellotto, editors, Advances in Information Retrieval, pages 357–371, Cham, 2025. Springer
Nature Switzerland.
16
Exploring How Fair Model Representations Relate to Fair Recommendations
[11] Maarten Buyl and Tijl De Bie. DeBayes: a Bayesian method for debiasing network embeddings. In Hal Daumé
III and Aarti Singh, editors, Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119
of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1220–1229. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.
[12] Theresia Veronika Rampisela, Tuukka Ruotsalo, Maria Maistro, and Christina Lioma. Can we trust recommender
system fairness evaluation? the role of fairness and relevance. SIGIR ’24, page 271–281, New York, NY, USA,
2024. Association for Computing Machinery.
[13] Aaron Clauset, Cosma Rohilla Shalizi, and M. E. J. Newman. Power-law distributions in empirical data. SIAM
Review, 51(4):661–703, 2009.
[14] Erica Coppolillo, Simone Mungari, Ettore Ritacco, and Giuseppe Manco. Genrec: A flexible data generator for
recommendations, 2024.
[15] F. Maxwell Harper and Joseph A. Konstan. The movielens datasets: History and context. ACM Trans. Interact.
Intell. Syst., 5(4), December 2015.
[16] Elliot Creager, David Madras, Joern-Henrik Jacobsen, Marissa Weis, Kevin Swersky, Toniann Pitassi, and
Richard Zemel. Flexibly fair representation learning by disentanglement. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, editors, Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1436–1445. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.
17
