Wasserstein Parallel Transport for Predicting the Dynamics of
Statistical Systems
Tristan Luca Saidi†
tsaidi@andrew.cmu.edu
Gonzalo Mena†
gmena@andrew.cmu.edu
Larry Wasserman†, ‡
larry@stat.cmu.edu
Florian Gunsilius∗
fgunsil@emory.edu
†Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie Mellon University
‡Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
∗Department of Economics, Emory University
March 26, 2026
Abstract
Many scientific systems, such as cellular populations or economic cohorts, are naturally
described by probability distributions that evolve over time.
Predicting how such a system
would have evolved under different forces or initial conditions is fundamental to causal inference,
domain adaptation, and counterfactual prediction. However, the space of distributions often
lacks the vector space structure on which classical methods rely. To address this, we introduce
a general notion of parallel dynamics at a distributional level. We base this principle on parallel
transport of tangent dynamics along optimal transport geodesics and call it “Wasserstein Parallel
Trends”. By replacing the vector subtraction of classic methods with geodesic parallel transport,
we can provide counterfactual comparisons of distributional dynamics in applications such as
causal inference, domain adaptation, and batch-effect correction in experimental settings. The
main mathematical contribution is a novel notion of fanning scheme on the Wasserstein manifold
that allows us to efficiently approximate parallel transport along geodesics while also providing
the first theoretical guarantees for parallel transport in the Wasserstein space. We also show
that Wasserstein Parallel Trends recovers the classic parallel trends assumption for averages
as a special case and derive closed-form parallel transport for Gaussian measures. We deploy
the method on synthetic data and two single-cell RNA sequencing datasets to impute gene-
expression dynamics across biological systems.
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Setup and Background
4
2.1
Optimal Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Dynamic Formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Riemannian Structure of the Wasserstein Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1
arXiv:2603.23736v1  [stat.ML]  24 Mar 2026
3
Parallel Transport
8
3.1
Exact Parallel Transport via the Covariant Derivative. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.1
Example: Wasserstein Parallel Transport with Gaussians
. . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Approximation via Base Parallel Transport and Jacobi Fields. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Approximate Wasserstein Parallel Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
Weighted Helmholtz-Hodge Decomposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Reconstructing Counterfactual Dynamics
17
4.1
Wasserstein Counterfactual Dynamics Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Application: Causal Inference via Wasserstein Difference-in-Differences . . . . . . . .
20
5
Experiments
22
5.1
Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
Real Data: Genomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
Conclusion
28
A Stability Theory for Wasserstein Parallel Transport
32
A.1 The Stability Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
A.2 Supplementary Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
B Proofs of Results From the Text
52
B.1
Proof of Theorem 3.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
B.2
Proof of Theorem 3.11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
B.3
Proof of Proposition 3.13
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
B.4
Proof of Lemma 3.8. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
B.5
Proof of Theorem 3.9. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
B.6
Proof of Proposition 3.7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
B.7
Proof of Lemma 4.3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
B.8
Proof of Theorem 4.6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
B.9
Supplementary Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
C RKHS Derivation
61
D Implementation Details
63
1
Introduction
Many scientific systems are naturally described by probability distributions that evolve over time,
such as cellular populations undergoing differentiation, income distributions responding to policy
changes, or ecological communities adapting to environmental shifts. A fundamental task is to
take the dynamics observed for one such system and predict how a second system with different
properties would have evolved under similar dynamics. This counterfactual question shows up in
several distinct guises; for instance, as causal effect estimation in observational studies, as out-of-
sample prediction when only one system is observed, and even in dynamic randomized treatment
estimation as we show below. In each case, the challenge is the same, namely, to transfer a temporal
trend from one distributional baseline to another.
Existing approaches to transferring dynamics rely on taking differences. In causal inference
with observational data for instance, Difference-in-Differences subtracts the observed change in the
2
reference group, relying on the parallel trends assumption (Abadie, 2005; Ashenfelter and Card,
1985). Powerful recent extensions (e.g. Zhou et al., 2025) generalize this to geodesic spaces by
requiring an abelian group structure, which is needed to define an analogous notion of “difference”.
We take a fundamentally different approach: rather than computing differences between systems,
we directly transport the instantaneous dynamics (the tangent velocity driving the evolution of one
system) to the baseline of another via geodesic parallel transport on the space of probability mea-
sures. This literally constructs a parallel trend. The method operates in continuous time and acts
on full distributions rather than moments. Moreover, because the method constructs counterfac-
tual trajectories directly rather than backing out treatment effects from assumed parallelism, it is
widely applicable. For instance, it allows for the correction of batch effects in randomized trials or
the imputation of unobserved dynamics when only one system’s dynamics are observed.
Our main technical contribution is the introduction of a novel fanning scheme (Louis et al.,
2018) on the Wasserstein manifold that allows us to efficiently approximate parallel transport along
geodesics while providing the first theoretical guarantees for parallel transport in the Wasserstein
space. By leveraging Jacobi fields on the base manifold (Gigli, 2012), the scheme circumvents the
nonlinear PDE that characterizes exact Wasserstein parallel transport (Ambrosio and Gigli, 2008).
We further show that curves in P2(Rd) that are parallel in the sense of the Levi-Civita connection on
the Wasserstein manifold necessarily have parallel means, recovering the classical equibias condition
(e.g. Sofer et al., 2016) for averages as a special case. We also derive closed-form expressions for
parallel transport between Gaussian measures by reducing the problem to a continuous Lyapunov
equation.
Our main application domain is single-cell genomics, where transcriptomic technologies produce
snapshots of gene-expression distributions at discrete time points under varying biological condi-
tions (Schiebinger et al., 2019; Schiebinger, 2021; Lavenant et al., 2024). Because measuring a cell’s
state destroys it, individual trajectories are unobservable, and one must reason at the population
level—a setting where optimal transport has become a standard modeling tool (Bunne et al., 2024).
A natural use case arises in controlled perturbation experiments, where two nominally clonal pop-
ulations are cultured in parallel and one receives treatment. In many such settings—particularly
in vitro systems or carefully designed time-course experiments—samples from control and treated
arms are collected and processed in a coordinated manner across timepoints, so that technical
variation is largely shared over time. If both populations were distributionally identical at base-
line, the control trajectory could serve directly as the counterfactual for the treated population.
In practice, however, even under these controlled conditions, replicates often exhibit systematic
baseline differences, commonly referred to as batch effects, arising from factors such as sample
handling or sequencing variation (Tran et al., 2020; Luecken et al., 2022). In these regimes, it
is often reasonable to approximate such discrepancies as structured, approximately time-invariant
shifts between distributions. Under this assumption, our method provides a geometric framework
for aligning dynamics across baselines: by parallel transporting the control dynamics along the
geodesic connecting the two initial distributions, we transfer the observed temporal trend to the
treated population while accounting for their initial misalignment. This approach operates on full
distributions rather than low-dimensional summaries, capturing differences beyond simple location
shifts. Its validity, however, relies on the extent to which the baseline discrepancy can be mean-
ingfully represented as a stable transformation across time, and is therefore best suited to settings
where time-varying technical effects or large compositional changes are limited.
Our work connects to several strands of literature. The problem of predicting counterfactual
dynamics is ubiquitous in causal inference and domain adaptation. In the causal inference litera-
ture, Difference-in-Differences (DiD) is the most prominent framework for leveraging parallel trends
to estimate treatment effects (Ashenfelter and Card, 1985; Card and Krueger, 1994; Abadie, 2005;
3
Roth et al., 2023). Distributional extensions have been pursued by Athey and Imbens (2006), who
propose univariate changes-in-changes using monotone transport, Torous et al. (2024), who gener-
alize the setting to multivariate outcomes, and by Sofer et al. (2016), who formulate distributional
DiD through quantile transport maps. Callaway and Li (2019) introduce parallel trends via a cop-
ula stability assumption. Zhou et al. (2025) extend DiD to geodesic spaces with an abelian group
structure. Other closely related approaches are distributional extensions of the synthetic controls
method (Abadie et al., 2010; Gunsilius, 2023; Gunsilius et al., 2024), which also create parallel
trends, but via averaging of possible control dynamics. Our method is applicable to all of these
settings but is not limited to causal inference (Gunsilius, 2025): it provides a general-purpose tool
for constructing counterfactual trajectories whenever one wishes to transfer observed dynamics to
a new distributional baseline.
Prior seminal uses of parallel transport on the Wasserstein manifold are due to Petersen and
M¨uller (2019) and Chen et al. (2023), who employ it for Fr´echet regression; both focus on the
univariate setting and address a fundamentally different problem.
Our framework can also be
viewed as a dynamic counterpart to optimal transport-based domain adaptation (Courty et al.,
2016), which aligns source and target distributions at a single time point; we instead transport
temporal dynamics themselves across distributional baselines.
In single-cell genomics, the main application in this paper, Bunne et al. (2023) use neural
optimal transport to learn maps from control to perturbed cell distributions. Their approach is
static in that it does not model temporal dynamics, and learns a direct map between observed
conditions rather than constructing a counterfactual against which a treatment effect can be mea-
sured. Our framework, by contrast, operates on evolving distributions over time, produces explicit
counterfactual trajectories that enable treatment-control comparisons, and provides a testable iden-
tifying assumption—Wasserstein Parallel Trends—supporting causal inference from observational
genomics data alongside pure counterfactual prediction in experimental settings.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows.
Section 2 reviews the background on
optimal transport and the Riemannian geometry of the Wasserstein space.
Section 3 develops
the theory of parallel transport on Wasserstein space over manifolds, introduces the novel fanning
scheme, and establishes its theoretical guarantees. Section 4 presents the counterfactual dynamics
prediction procedure, introduces the Wasserstein Parallel Trends assumption, and shows that it
recovers the classical equibias condition. Section 5 contains experiments on synthetic Gaussian
systems and two single-cell RNA sequencing datasets. All proofs are collected in the appendix.
2
Setup and Background
In this section we give an overview on the mathematical underpinnings of optimal transport and
Riemannian geometry as they pertain to our goals. For a fully detailed treatment of the theory
of optimal transport, we recommend Villani et al. (2009).
For a comprehensive treatment of
Riemannian and differential geometry, we recommend either Lee (2018) or Petersen (2006), and
Do Carmo (2016).
The Riemannian perspective on optimal transport that we describe in this
section follows closely the constructions described by Otto (2001), Gigli (2012) and Lott (2008),
and later expanded on by Clancy (2021).
2.1
Optimal Transport
Define P2(M) to be the set of probability measures with finite second moment over a complete,
connected and C∞Riemannian manifold M with metric tensor g.
For the sake of generality
and applicability to concurrent work, we will take M to be a Riemannian manifold satisfying the
4
properties described above, but all of our algorithmic instantiations and experiments will consider
M = Rd. The 2-Wasserstein distance between two probability measures µ, ν ∈P2(M) is defined by
W2(µ, ν) =
inf
γ∈Γµ,ν
Z
M×M
dM(x, y)2 γ(dx, dy)
1/2
(1)
where Γµ,ν denotes the set of couplings of µ and ν. The 2-Wasserstein distance (which we will
henceforth refer to as the Wasserstein distance) is indeed a metric, which renders (P2(M), W2) a
metric space. A key result is that of Brenier, who showed that for M = Rd, the optimal coupling
takes the form (X, ∇φ(X)), X ∼µ for some convex φ when µ is absolutely continuous with respect
to the Lebesgue measure.
Theorem 2.1 (Brenier). Let µ, ν ∈P2(Rd) be probability measures such that µ has a density, and
let X ∼µ. If γ∗is optimal for Equation (1) with M = Rd, then there exists a convex function
φ : Rd →R such that (X, ∇φ(X)) ∼γ∗.
This theorem guarantees that if the source measure has a density, then the optimal transport
coupling can be written as the source measure µ and ∇φ#µ, the pushforward of the source under
some convex function – note that the pushforward of a measure µ under a map T is simply the
measure (T#µ)(B) = µ(T −1(B)) for all measurable B. The function ∇φ from Theorem 2.1 is often
referred to as the Brenier map. This key theorem of Brenier will be central to our construction of
the Riemannian structure on the space of probability measures. We note that Brenier’s theorem
was later generalized to Riemannian manifolds, as described below. The result requires generalizing
the notion of convexity and concavity to non-Euclidean settings. In particular, given a function
ψ : M →R ∪{±∞} its infimal convolution ψc with a cost function c is defined by
ψc(y) = inf
x∈M {c(x, y) −ψ(x)} .
We say ψ is c-concave if and only if ψcc = (ψc)c = ψ.
Theorem 2.2 (Brenier-McCann, McCann (2001)). Let (M, g) be a complete Riemannian manifold
and let µ, ν ∈P2(M) with µ ≪volg. Then there exists a c-concave function φ : M →R with
c(x, y) = dM(x, y)2 such that the optimal plan (in the sense of Equation (1)) is induced by a µ-a.e.
unique map
T(x) = expx (−∇φ(x)) ,
γ∗= (id, T)#µ
where ∇is the Riemannian gradient and expp(v) is the Riemannian exponential map.
2.2
Dynamic Formulation
The optimal transport problem described above – one which looks for an optimal coupling of
source and target measures – is often referred to as the static formulation of optimal transport.
An equivalent perspective comes from fluid mechanics, which arrives at the same metric structure
through a different formulation. In particular, let (vt)t≥0 be a time dependent family of vector
fields over M, and consider the ODE ˙Xt = vt(Xt). Let µt denote the law of Xt, where X0 ∼µ0
and Xt evolves according to the ODE described previously. Then, the dynamics of µt obey the
so-called continuity equation,
∂tµt + divg(µtvt) = 0
(2)
in the weak (or distributional) sense, where divg is the Riemannian divergence.
5
Definition 2.3 (Weak solutions to Equation (2), Santambrogio (2015)). We say that a family of
pairs (µt, vt) solves the continuity equation on (0, T) in the distributional sense if for any bounded
and Lipschitz test function φ ∈C1
c ((0, T) × M) we have
Z T
0
Z
M
∂tφ dµtdt +
Z T
0
Z
M
⟨∇φ, vt⟩g dµtdt = 0.
It turns out, one can identify optimal transport maps with vector fields satisfying the continuity
equation that are optimal in a certain sense. This gives rise to the dynamic formulation of optimal
transport.
Theorem 2.4 (Benamou-Brenier, Chewi et al. (2024); Ambrosio and Gigli (2012)). Let µ0, µ1 ∈
P2(M) be absolutely continuous with respect to volg. Then
W 2
2 (µ0, µ1) = inf
(Z 1
0
∥vt∥2
L2(µt)dt
 (µt, vt)t∈[0,1] satisfies Definition 2.3
)
.
Moreover, if M = Rd then the optimal curve (µt)t≥0 is unique and is described by Xt ∼µt, where
Xt = (1 −t)X0 + tX1 and (X0, X1) ∼γ∗∈Γµ0,µ1 with γ∗being an optimal coupling.
2.3
Riemannian Structure of the Wasserstein Space
The Tangent Space. The dynamic formulation of optimal transport will be a key ingredient in
establishing the Riemannian structure of (P2(M), W2). In particular, we will construct the tangent
space from the space of solutions to the continuity equation, as they represent the vector space of
infinitesimal perturbations to a measure. But seeing as there are an infinite number of solutions to
the continuity equation, (as adding a divergence free field does not change the marginal behavior
of µt) we need to establish a selection principle. To do so, we will define a notion of a “derivative”
in a general metric space.
Definition 2.5 (Metric Derivative). Let (X, d) be a metric space and (xt)t≥0 be a curve in X. The
metric derivative of the curve at time t is given by
| ˙x|(t) ≜lim
s→t
d(xs, xt)
|s −t|
provided that the limit exists.
Now, for a pair of probability measures µ, ν ∈P2(M) where µ admits a density, we will write
Tµ→ν for the Brenier (or Brenier-McCann) map from µ to ν and we will write | ˙µ| for the metric
derivative of a curve in P2(M) with respect to the Wasserstein metric.
Theorem 2.6 (Ambrosio et al. (2005)). Let (M, g) be a smooth and complete Riemannian manifold
without boundary and let (µt)t≥0 be an absolutely continuous curve, i.e. µt admits a Riemannian
density and | ˙µt| exists for all t ≥0.
Then for every family of vector fields (vt)t≥0 for which
Equation (2) holds, it holds that | ˙µt|(t) ≤∥vt∥L2(µt) for all t ≥0. Moreover, there exists a unique
family (vt)t≥0 such that Equation (2) holds and for which | ˙µt|(t) = ∥vt∥L2(µt) for every t ≥0. This
family is such that
vt = lim
h→0+
 h−1 logx(Tµt→µt+h(x))

in L2(µt)
and
vt = min
n
∥˜vt∥2
L2(µt)
 ∂tµt + divg(˜vtµt) = 0
o
where log is the Riemannian logarithmic map.
6
Note that result coupled with Brenier’s theorem indicates that the velocity field that coincides
(in an L2(µt) sense) with the minimal norm solution and the metric derivative of the path is a limit
of gradients. This key fact gives rise to the definition of the tangent space and the metric tensor
for (P2(M), W2) at a measure µ.
Definition 2.7 (Wasserstein Tangent Space, Ambrosio and Gigli (2012)). Let µ ∈P2(M). We
define the tangent space to P2(M) at µ to be
TµP2(M) = {∇φ | φ ∈C∞
c (M)}
L2(µ)
(3)
where {·}
L2(µ) denotes the L2(µ) closure and C∞
c
denotes the set of compactly supported and smooth
maps. We also endow TµP2(M) with the metric tensor
⟨∇φ1, ∇φ2⟩µ ≜
Z
M
⟨∇φ1, ∇φ2⟩g dµ
(4)
where ⟨·, ·⟩g is the inner product defined by the metric tensor g.
The Covariant Derivative. On an abstract manifold (M, g) that isn’t embedded in an ambient
space, we have no obvious way to compare vectors in the tangent space at two points p, q ∈M,
p ̸= q. Therefore, we need a way of connecting the separate vector spaces TpM and TqM. One
can achieve this by defining a rule ∇for differentiating vector fields against each other on M in a
way that preserves the structure of the metric g. Note that we will adopt the standard notation
that a vector field X over M is an operator on functions – in particular, for some f : M →R, the
notation X(f) denotes the derivative of f in the direction described by X.
Definition 2.8 (The Covariant Derivative, Petersen (2006)). For a manifold (M, g) we define the
covariant derivative ∇to be a rule that assigns to each pair of vector fields X, Y over M another
vector field ∇XY satisfying
1. Linearity: ∇aX+bZY = a∇XY + b∇ZY.
2. Leibniz/derivation property: for f ∈C∞(M) we have ∇X(fY ) = X(f)Y + f∇XY , where
X(f) = g(X, ∇f) is the derivative of f in the direction X.
While this gives us a way to connect tangent spaces, the covariant derivative might distort the
geometry induced by the metric g – i.e. it might not be “metric compatible”. A fundamental result
of Riemannian geometry, however, is that for any Riemannian manifold (M, g) there exists a unique
connection that is torsion free and is “metric compatible”.
Theorem 2.9 (The Fundamental Theorem of Riemannian Geometry, Petersen (2006)). If M is
a finite dimensional manifold endowed with a Riemannian metric g, then there exists a unique
connection ∇called the Levi-Civita connection that is
1. Torsion free: ∇XY −∇Y X = [X, Y ], where [X, Y ](f) = X(Y (f)) −Y (X(f)) is the Lie
bracket of X and Y .
2. Metric compatible: Xg(Y, Z) = g(∇XY, Z) + g(Y, ∇XZ).
In the case of (P2(M, W2) we can explicitly construct the covariant derivative, but one needs to
manually verify that it is torsion free and metric compatible, as the space is an infinite-dimensional
Riemannian Manifold.
7
Proposition 2.10 (Wasserstein Covariant Derivative, Clancy (2021); Gigli (2012)). Let (µt)t≥0
be a curve through P2(M) with tangent field ∇φt solving Equation (2), and therefore driving the
dynamics of µt. Also let vt be another vector field along µt and let Πµt be the orthogonal projection
onto TµtP2(M) in L2(µt). Then the differential operator ∇W2
(∇φt) given by
∇W2
(∇φt)vt = Πµt

∂tvt + ∇M
(∇φt)vt

is a valid covariant derivative, is torsion free, and is metric compatible, where ∇M
(∇φt) is the Levi-
Civita connection on M. Moreover, when M = Rd, we have
∇W2
(∇φt)vt = Πµt (∂tvt + ∇vt · ∇φt) .
This result establishes a closed form PDE describing a differential operator with the desired
characteristics of the Levi-Civita connection. We remark that Πµt : L2(µt; M) →TµtP2(M) is the
orthogonal projection from the space of L2(µt; Rd) vector fields over M to the closure of L2(µt; Rd)
gradient fields over M. In practice, this operation amounts to a (Helmholtz-Hodge) decomposition
vt = ∇φt + wt where wt is the (weighted) divergence-free component of the vector field vt. We
discuss estimation of this Helmholtz-Hodge decomposition in Section 3.4.
The Exponential and Logarithmic Maps. For P2(M), the Wasserstein exponential map is
defined to be expµ(u) ≜(exp(u))#µ where exp(·) is the exponential map of M and u ∈L2(µ; Rd).
In the case of M = Rd, this operation is trivial – we have
expµ(u) = (id + u)#µ
(5)
where id is the identity map, x 7→x. In the case of the logarithmic map, things are analogous.
We define the Wasserstein logarithmic map to be (logµν)(x) ≜logx(Tµ→ν(x)) where Tµ→ν is the
Brenier map from µ to ν. Again, when M = Rd this reduces to
(logµν)(x) = (Tµ→ν −id)(x).
(6)
3
Parallel Transport
Having laid the groundwork of Wasserstein geometry, we will now move on to discussing parallel
transport in detail. In the first part of this section we will describe the characterization of parallel
transport via the covariant derivative. In the latter parts of this section, we will discuss a fully
general approximation scheme for parallel transport on P2(M) along well behaved Wasserstein
geodesics that uses Jacobi fields to avoid the PDE obtained from the covariant derivative.
3.1
Exact Parallel Transport via the Covariant Derivative.
Intuitively, a vector field along a curve is “unchanging” if its derivative is zero. In the context of
abstract manifolds, parallel transport is defined based on this principle: a vector field along a curve
is the parallel transport of a source vector if its covariant derivative along the curve is zero.
Definition 3.1 (Lee (2018)). Let M be a smooth Riemannian manifold. A smooth vector field X
along a smooth curve γ is said to be parallel along γ with respect to the Levi-Civita connection if
∇˙γX ≡0.
8
This characterization now allows us to define parallel transport on (P2(M), W2) using the
covariant derivative described in Proposition 2.10. Consider a smooth curve µt through P2(M)
indexed by t ∈(0, 1) with the tangent field ∇φt driving its dynamics. Then we have the following
definition.
Proposition 3.2 (Wasserstein Parallel Transport PDE). A vector field vt along µt is parallel along
µt with respect to ∇W2
(∇φt) if
divg

µt

∂tvt + ∇M
(∇φt)vt

= 0
for a.e. t ∈(0, 1).
Proof. Due to Definition 3.1 and Proposition 2.10 we know that vt is a parallel vector field along
the curve µt if Πµt

∂tvt + ∇M
(∇φt)vt

= 0 for almost every t ∈(0, 1). This is tantamount to the
requirement that divg

µt(∂tvt + ∇M
(∇φt)vt)

= 0 since the L2(µt) projection simply discards the
divergence free portion of the vector field.
This can be seen by the fact that the orthogonal
complement of the tangent space at a measure µt is
T ⊥
µtP2(M) =

w ∈L2(µt)
 divg(wµt) = 0
	
as stated in definition 1.29 of Gigli (2012). Thus, Πµt(w) = 0 ⇐⇒divg(µtw) = 0.
While Proposition 3.2 describes parallel transport along any curve, solving this PDE in practice
may be challenging, especially in high-dimensional settings. To this end, in the next section we will
describe an alternative approximate but tractable approach for computing parallel transport along
geodesics – our approach leverages the connection between parallel transport on the base space M
and parallel transport on P2(M) for any Riemannian manifold M (as established by Gigli (2012))
to enable parallel transport on P2(M). Since computing parallel transport on M is not always
feasible, we also describe a “fanning” scheme in which one can use Jacobi fields to approximate the
underlying parallel transport on M. But before doing that, we will derive and analyze Wasserstein
parallel transport on Gaussians to develop some intuition.
3.1.1
Example: Wasserstein Parallel Transport with Gaussians
To build up intuition for the behavior of Wasserstein parallel transport, we will explore the setting
where all measures are Gaussian and M = Rd. Fortunately, as is often the case, our object of interest
is available in closed form when dealing with Gaussian measures. This closed form expression for
parallel transport with Gaussian measures is detailed in Theorem 3.3. We provide the proof of
Theorem 3.3 in Section B.1.
Theorem 3.3 (Parallel Transport along Gaussian Geodesics). Let µ0, µ1 be two Gaussian proba-
bility measures parameterized by means m0, m1 and covariances Σ0, Σ1. Further let
v0(x) = a0 + A0(x −m0) ∈Tµ0P2(Rd),
A0 ∈Sd
be a tangent vector to µ0. Then the parallel tangent field vt along µt with initial condition v0 is
given by
vt(x) = a0 + At(x −mt)
with
At = A0 +
Z t
0
˙As ds
where mt = (1 −t)m0 + tm1, and ˙At solves the continuous Lyapunov equation
˙AtQt + Qt ˙At = S⊤
t AtQt + QtAtSt
9
with Qt = M−⊤
t
Σ−1
0 M−1
t
, Mt = (1 −t)Id + tB, St = (Id −B)M−1
t
and
B = Σ−1/2
0

Σ1/2
0
Σ1Σ1/2
0
1/2
Σ−1/2
0
.
For further intuition, Figure 1 instantiates the result presented in Theorem 3.3. The figure
illustrates how parallel transporting a tangent vector v ∈TνiP2(R2) along the geodesic between
νi and µ∗
i changes its behavior when used to push forward the measures νi and µ∗
i respectively.
In particular, we see the two ways in which Gaussian parallel transport preserves the nature of
the deformation of the measures – the left hand panel depicts how it preserves deformation to the
covariance, while the right hand panel depicts how it preserves changes to the mean.
Figure 1: Visualizations of Wasserstein Parallel Transport with Gaussian measures in R2. The left
panel illustrates how parallel transport captures deformations to the covariance, while the right
panel illustrates how it captures changes in the mean.
3.2
Approximation via Base Parallel Transport and Jacobi Fields.
When dealing with non-Gaussian measures, expressions for Wasserstein parallel transport are not
available in closed form. To this end, we will describe a fully general procedure that allows one
to approximate parallel transport along geodesics on P2(M) for any smooth, complete and con-
nected Riemannian manifold M. To do this we will leverage two key results: the first is the fact
that Wasserstein parallel transport of a tangent field v can be locally approximated by the parallel
transport of the tangent field on the base space M along the Lagrangian paths induced by the
optimal transport map associated with the geodesic (Gigli (2012), Equation 4.18). To give some
intuition for this phenomenon, we provide an illustration in Figure 2. The second key result will
be the fact that parallel transport on the base space M can also be locally approximated by a
specific Jacobi field (Louis et al. (2018)) – on many Riemannian manifolds, parallel transport is not
10
PTexpº(r')(v)
º
¹
M
P2(M)
v
v
PTexp(r')(v)
º
exp(r')
expº(r')
¹
Figure 2: Visualization of approximate Wasserstein parallel transport, where the approximate
tangent vector is given by the map p 7→PTexpp(∇φ(p))(v(p)) (left), and exact Wasserstein parallel
transport, where the true tangent vector is given by the map p 7→(PTexpν(∇φ)(v))(p) (right).
available in closed form, but we may have access to important objects like the Riemann curvature
tensor, the covariant derivative and the geodesic equations. In settings like this, one can use the
Jacobi field to approximate parallel transport. Although our experiments in this work consider the
case where M = Rd, in a concurrent work that develops the theory of parallel transport on the
space of general positive measures over Rd we require a non-Euclidean choice of M.
Jacobi Fields. Jacobi fields allow us to measure the effect of curvature on a one parameter family
of geodesics. A Jacobi field is a vector field along a geodesic γ capturing the difference between
a geodesic and a perturbed geodesic along the parameter of the family. Concretely, let γτ be a
smooth, one-parameter family of geodesics with γ0 = γ. Then
J(s) = ∂
∂τ γτ(s)

τ=0
∈Tγ(s)M
(7)
is a Jacobi field, and it describes the infinitesimal behavior of the geodesic family about τ = 0.
Jacobi fields satisfy the so-called Jacobi equation
∇˙γ∇˙γJ(s) + R(J(s), ˙γ(s))˙γ(s) = 0
(8)
where ∇is the covariant derivative (typically with respect to the Levi-Civita connection) ˙γ(s) =
dγ(s)/ds, and R(·, ·) is the Riemann curvature tensor. In differential geometry, the curvature tensor
of a Riemannian manifold M with a connection ∇measures the noncommutativity of the covariant
derivative, and is defined as
R(X, Y )Z = ∇X∇Y Z −∇Y ∇XZ −∇[X,Y ]Z
where X, Y, Z ∈X(M) are vector fields over the manifold. A key fact about Jacobi fields is the
following, which arises from the properties of the second-order ODE above.
11
Proposition 3.4 (Existence and Uniqueness of Jacobi Fields, Proposition 10.2 of Lee (2018)).
Let γp(s) = expp(su) be a geodesic through a Riemannian or pseudo-Riemannian manifold M for
some u ∈TpM. Then for every pair of vectors v, w ∈TpM there is a unique Jacobi field denoted
jp,u(v, w)(s) along γp(s) satisfying the initial conditions jp,u(v, w)(0) = v and ∇˙γpjp,u(v, w)(0) = w.
Observe that this result indicates that one can also define Jacobi fields along a geodesic by
solely specifying its zero and first order initial conditions. Henceforth, we will denote with J a
Jacobi field defined by a variation through geodesics, while we will denote with j a Jacobi field
defined through initial conditions. With this in mind, we will show that a particular Jacobi field
along M can be used to approximate parallel transport on M.
Proposition 3.5 (Fanning Scheme, Proposition B.3 of Louis et al. (2018)). Let Ω⊆M be a
compact subset of M with injectivity radius lower bounded by η, and let γp(s) = expp(su) be a
geodesic through (M, g) with γp([0, s]) ⊂Ω. Further denote PTM
0→s(v) as the parallel transport of
v ∈TpM from p = γp(0) to γp(s). Then there exists an A ≥0 such that for all s <
η
∥u∥g we have
s−1jp,u(0, v)(s) −PTM
0→s(v)

g ≤As2∥v∥g.
We will leverage this result to approximate parallel transport on P2(M) by using parallel trans-
port on M and a result from Gigli (2012) that guarantees that parallel transport on M and P2(M)
along regular curves are intimately linked.
3.3
Approximate Wasserstein Parallel Transport
To approximate P2(M) parallel transport we will use the fanning scheme described in Proposi-
tion 3.5 and the connection between M parallel transport and P2(M) parallel transport along
regular curves established by Gigli. Before we describe our approximation scheme, we need to
rigorously establish when Wasserstein parallel transport exists.
Definition 3.6 (Regular Curves, Gigli (2012)). Let (µt)t∈[0,1] be an absolutely continuous curve.
We say that (µt) is regular if its velocity vector field (vt) satisfies
Z 1
0
∥vt∥2
L2(µt) dt < ∞
and
Z 1
0
Lip(vt) dt < ∞
where Lip(vt) denotes the spatial Lipschitz constant of the field vt. Moreover, we say that (µt) is
strongly regular if
Z 1
0
∥vt∥2
L2(µt) dt < ∞
and
sup
t∈[0,1]
Lip(vt) < ∞.
Gigli’s notion of regularity on curves of measures is a very important one. In particular, Wasser-
stein parallel transport is only well defined along these regular curves. Along non-regular curves
of measures, the tangent space does not vary smoothly, and therefore parallel transport cannot
exist. Thus, for the remainder of this paper, we will consider curves of measures that are regular
in the sense described in Definition 3.6. Fortunately, when M = Rd, standard assumptions on the
densities of the source and target measures guarantee this regularity.
Proposition 3.7 (Existence of Wasserstein parallel transport, M = Rd). Assume that for the pair
of measures (µ, ν), their supports Ω, Ω∗⊂Rd are bounded and mutually uniformly convex domains
12
with respect to each other and have C4 boundaries.
Also assume that their Lebesgue densities
f ∈C2(Ω) and g ∈C2(Ω∗) satisfy
λ ≤f ≤Λ
∀x ∈Ω
and
λ ≤g ≤Λ
∀x ∈Ω∗
for some constants 0 < λ ≤Λ < ∞. Then, the quadratic cost optimal OT map pushing µ to ν,
∇φ, is a globally C2 diffeomorphism and is bi-Lipschitz. Furthermore, the Wasserstein geodesic
corresponding to ∇φ is regular in the sense of Definition 3.6, and Wasserstein parallel transport
therefore exists.
We provide the proof of Proposition 3.7 in Section B.6. This result describes sufficient conditions
on the measures that guarantees the needed regularity for the existence of Wasserstein parallel
transport when M = Rd. Note that when M ̸= Rd, we simply directly assume the needed regularity
of the curves of measures for parallel transport to exist. With this in mind, the following result
proposes an approximation scheme for parallel transport along regular geodesics between a source
ν and a target µ.
Lemma 3.8 (One step approximation of P2(M) Parallel Transport along regular curves). Let
(M, g) be a compact Riemannian manifold with injectivity radius bounded from below and suppose
ν ∈P2(M) is a measure with v ∈TνP2(M). Further let µ ∈P2(M) be the target measure and
assume that there exists a u such that t 7→νt ≜(Ft)# ν, t ∈[0, 1] (with Ft ≜exp(tu)) traces out a
strongly regular geodesic between ν and µ with velocity field ∇ψt. Then for s sufficiently small and
for ws defined as
ws = Πνs
 s−1jν,u (0, v) (s)

with
jν,u (0, v) (s) ≜
 x 7→jx,u(x) (0, v(x)) (s)

◦F −1
s
we have
∥ws −PTν→νs(v)∥L2(νs) ≤As2∥v∥L2(ν) +

e
R 1
0 Lip(∇ψr)dr −1
2
∥v∥L2(ν)
Z s
0
Lip(∇ψr)dr
2
.
Moreover, the strong regularity of t 7→νt guarantees that ws approximates PTν→νs(v), the parallel
transport of v along the geodesic expν(tu), in the sense that
∥ws −PTν→νs(v)∥L2(νs) ≤Cs2
for some C > 0 independent of s.
We provide the proof of Lemma 3.8 in Section B.4.
This result allows us to approximate
parallel transport of a tangent vector v on (P2(M), W2) along strongly regular geodesics, provided
that we are able to solve for the Jacobi field jν,u on the base space M – in particular, this scheme
approximates Wasserstein parallel transport along an entire strongly regular geodesic by dividing it
into a large number of small segments, and locally parallel transporting the tangent field along the
paths defined by the optimal transport map. Note that if one takes the base space M = Ω⊂⊂Rd,
the Jacobi field approximation can be replaced with the exact Euclidean parallel transport, which
is simply the identity map composed with the pullback. In other cases of constant curvature, Jacobi
field solutions are available in closed form. Equipped with this general result, we will now describe
a procedure to approximate geodesic Wasserstein parallel transport that achieves O(N−1) accuracy
(where N is a user-chosen approximation resolution) detailed in Theorem 3.9. We provide the proof
in Section B.5.
Theorem 3.9 (Approximation of P2(M) Parallel Transport along strongly regular curves). Con-
sider the setting of Lemma 3.8, where ν and µ are connected by a strongly regular geodesic and
13
define the approximate parallel transport map c
PTs1→s2 to be the one described by the procedure of
Lemma 3.8. Fix some n ∈N, let s = 1/N, define the maps
c
PTk ≜c
PT(k−1)s→ks
and
PTk ≜PT(k−1)s→ks
and let vk = (PTk ◦· · · ◦PT1)(v) and ˆvk = ( c
PTk ◦· · · ◦c
PT1)(v). Then we have
∥ˆvN −vN∥L2(µ) = O(N−1).
Algorithm 1 Approximate Wasserstein Parallel Transport (WPT)
Require: Abs. continuous ν, µ ∈P2(M), tangent vector v ∈TνP2(M), discretization level N.
1: Compute the Brenier map Tν→µ.
2: Set u(x) = logx(Tν→µ(x)) and s = 1/N.
▷u generates the geodesic
3: for i = 0, . . . , N do
4:
Fi(x) = expx
 isu(x)

.
5: v0 = v.
▷initialize transported field
6: for i = 1 to N do
7:
νi = (Fi)#ν, Si = Fi ◦F −1
i−1, ui(x) = logx(Si(x)).
▷one-step transport
8:
wi(x) = s−1j(x,ui(x))(0, vi−1(x))(s).
▷Jacobi propagation on M
9:
vi = Πνi(wi ◦S−1
i
).
▷project to TνiP2(M)
10: return vN ∈TµP2(M).
3.4
Weighted Helmholtz-Hodge Decomposition
The L2(µ) projection of velocity fields required in Algorithm 1 is a non-trivial computational
procedure, and it warrants further discussion.
In this section we will propose a procedure for
estimating this vector field projection using Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) regression.
In this section we will assume that the measure µ has a Lebesgue density ρ.
The projection
Πµ : L2(µ; Rd) →TµP2(Rd) maps L2(µ; Rd) vector fields to the L2(µ) closure of gradient fields
through the following optimization procedure,:
Πµ(v) = arg min
u∈Gµ ∥u −v∥2
L2(µ)
where Gµ ≜{∇ϕ : ϕ ∈C∞
c (Rd)}
L2(µ).
To estimate this projection from samples, we will use
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) regression.
A Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) is a Hilbert space H of functions f : X →R with
a so-called reproducing kernel K : X × X →R characterized by the property that K(x, ·) ∈H
and f(x) = ⟨K(x, ·), f⟩H (Aronszajn, 1950). A key reason for the widespread adoption of RKHSs
in statistical applications is the representer theorem, which characterizes solutions of regression
problems when optimizing over the function class H subject to a norm penalty.
Theorem 3.10 (Representer Theorem). For a dataset X = {xi}n
i=1, consider an RKHS H of
functions f : X →R with a kernel K. For the optimization problem
f∗∈arg min
f∈H
n
X
i=1
|f(xi) −yi|2 + λ∥f∥2
H
14
the solution can be expressed as
f∗=
n
X
i=1
αiK(xi, ·)
for a set of scalars α1, . . . , αn.
One can find a proof by Ghojogh et al. (2021).
The result stems from the fact that the
optimization problem is a norm-penalized L2(Pn) projection onto the RKHS, and solutions therefore
lie in the span of kernel sections K(xi, ·).
The critical implication is that for a fixed dataset
{x1, . . . , xn} one only needs to solve for α = (α1, . . . , αn)⊤∈Rn via
α∗∈arg min
α∈Rn ∥Y −Kα∥2
2 + λα⊤Kα
which has the solution α = (K + λIn)−1Y where Kij = K(xi, xj) when K is invertible. To adapt
this to our setting, where we instead want to find the best gradient-field solution, we will make the
following modification. Let H be a scalar RKHS on Rd with a twice-differentiable Mercer kernel
(see Zhou (2008)) K ∈C2(Rd×Rd) and consider the function class {∇f : f ∈H}. For a population
measure µ and target field v : Rd →Rd define the population-level solution
f∗
λ ∈arg min
f∈H
n
∥∇f(x) −v(x)∥2
L2(µ) + λ∥f∥2
H
o
(9)
and the sample analogue
ˆfλ ∈arg min
f∈H
(
1
n
n
X
i=1
∥∇f(xi) −v(xi)∥2
2 + λ∥f∥2
H
)
.
(10)
We then have the following result, which we call the gradient representer theorem. We provide the
proof of Theorem 3.11 in Section B.2.
Theorem 3.11 (Gradient Representer Theorem). The optimization problem in Equation (10) has
a solution of the form ˆfλ(·) = Pn
i=1⟨ci, ∇K(xi, ·)⟩for some set of vectors ci ∈Rd and the inner
product is the standard Euclidean inner product on Rd.
As with classical RKHS regression, we can obtain a closed-form solution for the empirical
optimizers c∗
1, . . . , c∗
n by solving a linear system. Let D ∈Rnd×nd be the block matrix where Dij =
∇2
2K(xi, xj) ∈Rd×d, let G ∈Rnd×nd be a block Gram matrix where Gij = ∇1∇2K(xi, xj) ∈Rd×d
and define the stacked vectors
c ≜(c1, . . . , cn)⊤∈Rnd
and
v ≜(v(x1), . . . , v(xn))⊤.
It follows that the RKHS norm of ˆf can be written as ∥ˆf∥2
H = c⊤Gc, and our empirical objective
function is
J(c) = 1
n∥Dc −v∥2
2 + λc⊤Gc.
If D⊤D + nλG is invertible, then the objective function admits a unique minimizer c∗= (D⊤D +
nλG)−1D⊤v, and our estimated projected field is given by
∇ˆfn,λ =


∇ˆf(x1)
...
∇ˆf(xn)

= Dc.
We provide the full derivation of the empirical objective function J and the solution ∇ˆfn,λ in
Section C. We will now show that this procedure is consistent for estimating the Helmholtz-Hodge
projection.
15
Theorem 3.12. Let Ω⊂Rd be compact, let µ be a probability measure supported on Ω, and let
v ∈L2(µ; Rd) such that ∥v(x)∥2 ≤M < ∞for µ-a.e. x. Let H be a scalar RKHS on Rd with
kernel K, and assume:
1. For each j ∈{1, . . . , d} and x ∈Rd, the derivative representer ψj exists,
ψj(x) ≜∂jK(x, ·) ∈H
and
κ2 ≜sup
x∈Rd
d
X
j=1
∥ψj(x)∥2
H < ∞.
2. The RKHS gradient class is dense in the gradient subspace, i.e. {∇f : f ∈H}
L2(µ) = Gµ.
Define
ˆfn,λ ∈arg min
f∈H
(
1
n
n
X
i=1
∥∇f(xi) −v(xi)∥2
2 + λ∥f∥2
H
)
where x1, . . . , xn ∼µ. Then if λ = O(n−ℓ) for any ℓ∈(0, 1/2), we have
∥∇ˆfn,λ −Πµ(v)∥L2(µ)
p
−→0.
Proof. Let f∗
λ be defined as in Equation (9). To prove this result we will leverage the results of
De Vito et al. (2005), where the consistency that we desire is proven for bounded linear operators
A : H →K where K is another Hilbert space.
Under the hypotheses stated, Proposition B.3
indicates that the operator A = ∇is indeed a bounded linear operator. Theorem 5 of De Vito
et al. (2005) gives ∥∇ˆfλ −Pv∥L2(µ) →0 where P is the orthogonal projection onto Ran(A), which
in our case satisfies
Ran(A) = {∇f : f ∈H}
L2(µ).
Since the space {∇f : f ∈H} is assumed to be dense in {∇f : f ∈C∞
c (Rd)}
L2(µ), we know that
Pv = Πµ(v).
Theorem 3.12 guarantees consistency of the RKHS procedure under the assumption that the
function class is dense in the space of gradients of functions of interest. We will now show that
this property is satisfied when one chooses a kernel inducing an RKHS that is norm-equivalent to
a Sobolev space of finite smoothness. Recall that a Sobolev space W k,p(R) for 1 ≤p ≤∞is the
subset of functions f in Lp(R) such that f and its weak derivatives up to order k have finite Lp
norm. When p = 2, the function space forms a Hilbert space and we denote Hk = W k,2.
Proposition 3.13 (Sufficient conditions for density). Let µ be a measure supported on a compact
domain Ω⊂Rd. Suppose that µ admits a Lebesgue density ρ satisfying ρ ≤M < ∞, and let K
be a kernel such that H, the RKHS induced by K, is set and norm equivalent (denoted ∼=) to the
Sobolev space Hτ(Rd) for some τ ∈N. Then
{∇f : f ∈H}
L2(µ) = {∇f : f ∈C∞
c (Rd)}
L2(µ).
and thus {∇f : f ∈H} is dense in {∇f : f ∈C∞
c (Rd)}
L2(µ).
We provide the proof of Proposition 3.13 in Section B.3. The result indicates that any choice
of kernel yielding an RKHS that is equivalent (as sets and in norm) to the Sobolev space Hτ(Rd)
16
Figure 3: Estimated projection of a non-conservative vector field onto the space of gradient fields
using the procedure described in Section 3.4
for some τ ≥1 yields the density condition needed for consistency (Theorem 3.12). An example of
such a kernel is the M´atern kernel (Mat´ern, 1960),
Ka,p(x, y) = 21−p
Γ(p)
∥x −y∥2
a

Kp
∥x −y∥2
a

(11)
for some a, p > 0 where Kp(·) is the modified Bessel function of the second kind (Emery et al.,
2025).
When one chooses this kernel with p > 0, the kernel’s spectral density bK(ω) satisfies
bK(ω) ≍(1 + ∥ω∥2
2)−p−d/2, which makes it norm equivalent to Hp+d/2(Rd) (Emery et al., 2025).
4
Reconstructing Counterfactual Dynamics
Equipped with an algorithm for approximating Wasserstein parallel transport, we will now leverage
it to construct a procedure for predicting dynamics on the space of measures under a parallel trends
assumption. In this section we will explicitly state the algorithm, and we will prove an error bound
that quantifies the distance between the predicted counterfactual dynamics and the true dynamics;
we note that this error bound represents population level approximation error, and does not include
statistical error.
We defer a rigorous treatment of the statistical aspects of estimating parallel
transport to future work. After describing the algorithm, we will illustrate the conceptual utility
of this procedure by instantiating it in the Difference-in-Differences framework in Causal Inference,
and showing that it recovers the well known parallel trends assumption.
4.1
Wasserstein Counterfactual Dynamics Prediction
Our procedure for predicting counterfactual dynamics will follow that depicted in Figure 4. In
particular, given a control curve {νi}i∈{1,...,T} ⊂P2(M) and an initial condition µ∗
1, we will predict
{ˆµ∗
i }i∈[2,...,T] as follows: at a given iteration i we will first estimate the tangent velocity driving the
dynamics of νi at the current time. We will then approximate the parallel transport of this tangent
velocity on the geodesic between the current νi and the most recent prediction ˆµ∗
i – note that
when i = 1, ˆµ∗
1 is set to the initial condition µ1. Finally, we will push ˆµ∗
i through the Wasserstein
exponential map with the parallel transported velocity.
While our theoretical results in previous sections allowed for non-Euclidean choices of M, in
this section our error bounds consider the setting M = Td, where Td is the flat torus defined by
17
r'0
r'1
c
PT( d
r'0)
c
PT( d
r'1)
º0
º0
¹¤
0
¹¤
0
P2(M)
P2(M)
º1
¡!
¡! : : :
º1
¹¤
1
º2
º2
b¹¤
1
b¹¤
1
b¹¤
2
Figure 4: Visualization of counterfactual dynamics prediction procedure described in Algorithm 2.
Td = Rd/Zd. We restrict our analysis to this setting in analyzing our counterfactual dynamics
prediction algorithm as the analysis requires stability bounds on Wasserstein parallel transport
that are challenging to obtain in non-Euclidean settings, and settings where the domain has a
boundary. We also note that our intention with the theoretical results presented in this section
are to rigorously quantify how our approximation scheme affects predicted dynamics away from
the boundary of the support; this goal makes M = Td a natural choice, as it is a boundaryless,
compact and flat space.
Assumption 4.1 (Uniform admissibility of the trajectory class, M = Td). There exists a class
C ⊂P2(Td) such that the measures appearing in the procedure satisfy νi, µ∗
i , ˆµ∗
i ∈C for all i ∈
{1, . . . , T}. Moreover, we require the following:
(A.1) Density regularity conditions: All measures µ ∈C, and all pairwise Wasserstein inter-
polants µt thereof, admit Lebesgue densities ρ, ρt such that:
(a) there exist constants 0 < λ ≤Λ < ∞such that λ ≤ρ ≤Λ and λ ≤ρt ≤Λ.
(b) the interpolating densities are uniformly bounded in a Sobolev sense, i.e.
sup
t∈[0,1]
∥ρt∥W 1,∞(Td) ≤K.
(c) the map t 7→ρt is absolutely continuous as a map from [0, 1] into L∞(Td) and the
interpolating densities have a uniformly bounded time derivative, i.e.
sup
t∈[0,1]
∥∂tρt∥L∞(Td) ≤Kρ
(d) the interpolating densities have a uniformly bounded score function in an L∞sense,
i.e.
sup
t∈[0,1]
∥∇log ρt∥L∞(Td) ≤Klog.
18
(A.2) Wasserstein geodesic Lipschitz conditions: All triplets (ν, µ, µ′) ∈C satisfy the fol-
lowing:
(a) the densities ρt, ρ′
t of the Wasserstein interpolants of (ν, µ) and (ν, µ′) satisfy
∥ρt −ρ′
t∥L∞(Td) ≤CL · W2(µ, µ′)
and
∥ρt −ρ′
t∥W 1,∞(Td) ≤CW W2(µ, µ′)
for some CL, CW > 0.
(b) the tangent velocities ∇ϕt, ∇ϕ′
t of the Wasserstein interpolants of (ν, µ) and (ν, µ′)
satisfy
∥∇ϕt −∇ϕ′
t∥L∞(Td) ≤Cvel · W2(µ, µ′).
(A.3) Wasserstein geodesic regularity conditions: All pairs (ν, µ) ∈C admit geodesic inter-
polants µt with velocity fields ∇ϕt that are uniformly bounded in a Sobolev sense
sup
t∈[0,1]
∥∇ϕt∥W 1,∞(Td) ≤M
for some M > 0.
In this section, we will operate under the conditions detailed in Assumption 4.1. These assump-
tions guarantee the existence of strongly regular geodesics (in the sense of Definition 3.6) between
all pairs of measures of interest. Moreover, the assumptions guarantee the stability of Wasserstein
parallel transport needed to obtain error bounds for our dynamics prediction algorithm, Algo-
rithm 2.
Theorem 4.2 (Theorem A.3, Stability of Wasserstein Parallel Transport). Suppose all statements
in Assumption 4.1 hold. Then there exists a constant CWPT > 0, depending only on the constants
above, such that for every v ∈TνP2(Td) ∩H1(ν; Rd),
∥PTν→µ(v) −PTν→µ′(v)∥L2(ν) ≤CWPT ∥v∥H1(ν) W2(µ, µ′).
We provide the proof of Theorem 4.2 in Section A.1. This stability result allows us to control
the error of the iterative dynamics prediction algorithm described in Algorithm 2 by ensuring that
small approximation errors in the counterfactual do not cause unbounded growth in the terminal
error of the parallel transported tangent at the approximate counterfactual. Concretely, we use
this stability to establish the following one-step error bound described in Lemma 4.3.
Algorithm 2 Counterfactual dynamics prediction via WPT
Require: Sufficiently regular control trajectory (νi)T
i=1, treated initial condition µ1 ∈P2(M),
discretization level N.
1: Initialize ˆµ∗
1 ←µ1.
▷starting counterfactual state
2: for i = 1 to T −1 do
3:
Compute Tνi→νi+1.
4:
Set v(i)(x) ≜logx(Tνi→νi+1(x)).
▷control velocity
5:
ˆw(i) = WPT(νi, ˆµ∗
i , v(i), N).
▷Algorithm 1
6:
ˆµ∗
i+1 = expˆµ∗
i ( ˆw(i)).
▷advance counterfactual state
7: return (ˆµ∗
i )T
i=1.
19
Lemma 4.3 (One step error of Algorithm 2, M = Td). Let νi, νi+1, µ∗
i , ˆµ∗
i ∈C, where C is the
admissible class from Assumption 4.1. Suppose there exists a tangent vector ∇φi ∈TνiP2(Td) such
that
expνi(∇φi) = νi+1.
Let ∇φ∗
i denote the parallel transport of ∇φi along the strongly regular Wasserstein geodesic con-
necting νi and µ∗
i , and define
µ∗
i+1 ≜expµ∗
i (∇φ∗
i ).
Let ˆv be the output of Algorithm 2 used to predict the next counterfactual iterate
ˆµ∗
i+1 ≜expˆµ∗
i (ˆv).
Then
W2(ˆµ∗
i+1, µ∗
i+1) ≤

1 + Lip(∇φ∗
i ) + ∥∇φi∥H1(Td)CWPT

W2(ˆµ∗
i , µ∗
i ) + O(N−1).
We provide the proof of Lemma 4.3 in Section B.7. The result establishes that each iteration
of the procedure incurs an O(N−1) error of the counterfactual prediction in a Wasserstein sense.
Fortunately, since N corresponds to the user chosen approximation resolution, the one step error
can be made arbitrarily small. We also have the following corollary, which quantifies the cumulative
error over the entire procedure.
Theorem 4.4. In the regime described in Assumption 4.1 we have the following accumulated error
bound on the counterfactual trajectory,
T
X
i=1
W2(ˆµi, µ∗
i ) = O
 T
N · (1 + L +SCWPT)T −1
L +SCWPT

under the assumption that ∥∇φi∥H1(Td) ≤S and Lip(∇φ∗
i ) ≤L for all i ∈{1, . . . , T −1}. In the
setting where T = Θ(1) and N →∞, the accumulated error is o(1).
Proof. The result of Lemma 4.3 implies a recurrence relation of the form at+1 = cat +r and a0 = 0,
the solution to which has the form
at =
(
r · ct−1
c−1
when c ̸= 1
tr
when c = 1 .
Plugging in c = 1 + L +SCWPT and r = O(N−1) yields the time-indexed error. Summing over i
yields the result.
Now we are equipped with a consistent method for imputing the dynamics of a reference curve
{νi}i∈{1,...,T} onto a new initial condition via Wasserstein parallel transport. In the following sec-
tions, we will discuss and explore applications of this algorithm to various settings and datasets.
4.2
Application: Causal Inference via Wasserstein Difference-in-Differences
In this section we describe an instantiation of our algorithm in Causal Inference – in particular, we
illustrate how it can be used to extend the Difference-in-Differences (DiD) framework from scalar
to distribution-valued outcomes. The traditional DiD framework is as follows: we observe subjects
at time 0 and time 1 where a treatment has been administered somewhere in between, with the
observations denoted (Y0, Y1). We denote Y0(0) and Y1(0) as the counterfactual outcome, had this
subject not been treated. While Yi(1) need not be equal to Yi in general, we will assume that this
20
Time
Outcome
Pre
Post
t0
Z1
Y1
Y1(0)
P2(M)
νt
µt
µ∗
t
t0
Figure 5: Difference-in-differences diagram illustrating the parallel trends assumption in the Eu-
clidean case (left) and the Wasserstein case (right). The goal is to reconstruct the counterfactual
(denoted Yt(0) on the left and µ∗
t on the right).
is the case – this is commonly referred to as the consistency assumption. We also observe a control
group at the two times whose observations are denoted (Z0, Z1). Since the control group is untreated,
any difference between Z0 and Z1 stems from unobserved confounding. A standard assumption in
the Difference-in-Differences framework is the equibias or the parallel trends assumption, which
stipulates that E[Y1(0) −Y0(0)] = E[Y1 −Y0] −E[Z1 −Z0] ensuring that the trends in untreated
individuals are “parallel” (Abadie, 2005) and allowing us to recover the treatment effect. Note that
this procedure typically operates on the level of first-order moments, and it does not deal with the
full counterfactual distribution.
In many cases, we care about the laws µt ≜Law(Yt) and νt ≜Law(Zt) as opposed to statis-
tics like their expected value, but we cannot take differences on P2(M) to subtract off differences
in initial conditions.
To remedy this, we will apply Wasserstein parallel transport.
In partic-
ular, we consider the setting where the population-level treated, untreated and control objects
can be represented by piecewise-geodesic trajectories through P2(M).
For a set of observation
times {ti}i∈{1,...,T} ⊂[0, 1], we denote (µti)i∈{1,...,T} the path corresponding to the treated popula-
tion, (νti)i∈{1,...,T} the path corresponding to the untreated population, and (µ∗
ti)i∈{1,...,T} the path
corresponding to the counterfactual treated population. Our goal is to emulate the Difference-in-
Differences procedure and reconstruct the population counterfactual trajectory (µ∗
ti)i∈{1,...,T} given
the control trajectories and the initial condition of the treated population µ∗
t0 (before treatment).
Assumption 4.5 (Wasserstein Parallel Trends). We assume that the trajectories (νti)i∈{1,...,T} and
(µ∗
ti)i∈{1,...,T} are parallel in the following sense: for all i ∈{1, . . . , T −1}, the tangent velocity at
νti given by ∇φti ≜logνti(νti+1) and the tangent velocity at µ∗
i given by ∇φ∗
ti = logµ∗
ti(µ∗
ti+1) are
parallel with respect to the connection ∇W2 in the sense that
∇φ∗
ti = PTνti→µ∗
ti(∇φti)
where PTνti→µ∗
ti is the parallel transport of ∇φti along the Wasserstein geodesic between νti and
µ∗
ti.
In order for the counterfactual trajectory to be recoverable, we need an assumption analogous to
the parallel trends assumption in Euclidean Differences-in-Differences. Since we are not considering
objects living in a vector space, we have no notion of taking differences.
Instead we will use
21
Wasserstein parallel transport to formulate an analogous assumption. This assumption, which we
call Wasserstein Parallel Trends, is described in Assumption 4.5, and we provide a visualization
in Figure 5. Furthermore, we have the following key result, which establishes that when M = Rd,
parallel curves in Wasserstein space have parallel means too.
Theorem 4.6 (Wasserstein Parallel Trends recovers Parallel Trends in Rd). Suppose (νt)t∈[0,1] and
(µ∗
t )t∈[0,1] are curves of absolutely continuous measures in P2(Rd), and suppose that the curves have
tangent velocity fields ∇φt, ∇φ∗
t that are parallel with respect to ∇W2 for all t, in the sense that
∇φ∗
t = PTνt→µ∗
t (∇φt)
∀t ∈[0, 1].
Then it holds that for a.e. t
d
dt
Z
Rd x dνt(x) = d
dt
Z
Rd x dµ∗
t (x).
We provide the proof of Theorem 4.6 in Section B.8. This result ensures that our assumptions
recover the classical equibias assumption, while also capturing changes in the global “shape” of the
distribution. We believe that this result motivates the application of Wasserstein parallel transport
and our proposed counterfactual dynamics procedure in Causal inference settings; in particular,
augmenting DiD with Wasserstein parallel transport would enable estimation of treatment effects
that manifest through changes in the shape of the distribution in addition to changes in the means.
5
Experiments
We now pivot to demonstrating the utility of our conceptual framework and proposed algorithms
through simulations.
We begin by showing simulation results of our approximation scheme on
synthetic data, documented in Section 5.1. Then, we apply our counterfactual dynamics prediction
method to two single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq) datasets, where we impute the gene-level
dynamics of one biological system onto another. We provide these genomics experiments in Sec-
tion 5.2.
For a detailed treatment of our exact computational implementation of approximate
Wasserstein parallel transport (Algorithm 1) and the counterfactual dynamics prediction method
(Algorithm 2), please see Section D.
5.1
Simulations
We begin by evaluating our proposed algorithms on synthetic data. In particular, we evaluate
Algorithm 2 on a stochastic system of time-evolving Gaussian measures, as in this regime we have
access to closed form parallel transport expressions (which we derived in Section 3.1.1). We explore
how the dimension d affects the quality of the predicted trajectories as measured by Wasserstein
distance, and we compare across methods.
As mentioned, Figure 6 illustrates an application of Algorithm 2 to a system of Gaussian
measures evolving in parallel. The top row consists of a sequence of measures where the mean
evolves in time, while the bottom row illustrates a sequence where both the mean and the covariance
evolves in time.
We display the reconstructed parallel curves in warm colors for our method
(Algorithm 2) and for two baselines: the first baseline applies the same change in mean as observed
in the control trajectory to the counterfactual initial condition.
The second baseline uses the
trajectory induced by the Brenier map between successive time points on the control curve without
using parallel transport. In this setup we use the ground truth Brenier map between the underlying
22
control Gaussian measures as extending the empirical Brenier map out of sample is nontrivial –
while this is not a tractable baseline in practice, we believe it to be illustrative.
Figure 6 indicates that the cumulative error for the system of Gaussians with evolving means
and stationary covariances grows at a comparable rate for our method and the baselines as expected.
Since the covariances of the sequence of measures is unchanging, one would expect that the mean-
sensitive baseline is successful. Moreover, the stationary nature of the covariances guarantees that
the Brenier map is just a shift; this explains the good performance. For the system with a non-
stationary covariance, however, we see a significantly faster growth in the cumulative error in the
baseline methods. The mean-shifted baseline method evidently doesn’t incorporate information
about the change in the shape of the distribution over time, while the Brenier map baseline clearly
doesn’t lead to imputed dynamics that are parallel in any desirable sense.
(a) Parallel sequences of Gaussian measures with changing means.
(b) Parallel sequences of Gaussian measures with changing means and changing covariances.
Figure 6: Illustration of the parallel transported dynamics for two systems of time-evolving Gaussian
measures using our method and two baselines.
To get a sense of how the performance of our method depends on dimension, we also evaluate
on Gaussian measures for d ∈{2, 4, 8, 12, 16}. In particular, we compute the Wasserstein distance
between the true and predicted pushforward of a parallel transported tangent between two random
Gaussian measures. We report the results of our method, the mean-shift baseline and the (non
parallel transported) Brenier map baseline as a function of dimension in Table 1. In this table we
add an “estimated” Gaussian baseline (labeled “Gauss PT”), which estimates the parameters of
a Gaussian and then applies closed form Gaussian parallel transport (Theorem 3.3). We wish to
highlight two key takeaways from this experiment – firstly, we see that our method without the
Helmholtz projection consistently outperforms all other methods (except the estimated Gaussian
baseline) for small d (d < 10). The superior performance of the estimated Gaussian baseline can be
attributed to the fact that WPT−is more general, and the estimated Gaussian baseline is applicable
23
only for Gaussian measures. When d > 10, however, our method is comparable in performance to
the simple mean-shift baseline; this is unsurprising, as the empirical mean estimates the true mean
at a √n-rate, while plugin estimators for optimal transport maps are known to suffer from error
rates that have an exponential dependence on the dimension d (Deb et al., 2021; Manole et al.,
2024). We therefore suggest that for high dimensional problems, one should opt to employ the
Gaussian estimation or the simple mean-shift baseline.
Step
d = 2
d = 4
WPT
WPT−
Brenier
Shift
Gauss PT
WPT
WPT−
Brenier
Shift
Gauss PT
1
0.606
0.142
2.242
0.277
0.118
3.300
0.400
4.669
0.512
0.401
2
1.609
0.121
3.740
0.418
0.101
7.490
0.432
7.765
0.728
0.429
3
2.988
0.124
4.926
0.582
0.097
12.700
0.455
10.283
0.935
0.462
4
4.816
0.145
5.965
0.729
0.139
18.462
0.475
12.477
1.122
0.463
5
7.163
0.114
6.884
0.838
0.090
24.186
0.486
14.463
1.264
0.466
Step
d = 8
d = 12
WPT
WPT−
Brenier
Shift
Gauss PT
WPT
WPT−
Brenier
Shift
Gauss PT
1
5.285
1.277
7.091
1.333
1.284
5.534
1.943
6.483
1.920
1.897
2
11.644
1.446
12.026
1.697
1.423
12.555
2.199
10.869
2.311
2.067
3
18.130
1.559
15.935
1.992
1.517
20.659
2.415
14.640
2.707
2.236
4
25.011
1.673
19.322
2.269
1.625
29.407
2.560
17.918
3.074
2.322
5
31.928
1.740
22.533
2.516
1.686
38.225
2.681
20.841
3.391
2.405
Step
d = 16
WPT
WPT−
Brenier
Shift
Gauss PT
1
6.660
2.651
8.642
2.489
2.544
2
14.538
3.048
13.875
2.922
2.842
3
23.431
3.341
18.104
3.329
3.067
4
32.890
3.577
21.703
3.747
3.216
5
42.623
3.737
24.906
4.089
3.400
Table 1: W2 between predicted and true Gaussian CF (under Wasserstein Parallel Trends) across
dimensions using 5000 samples. WPT denotes Wasserstein parallel transport with projection (Algo-
rithm 2), WPT−omits the projection step, Brenier applies the control OT map without transport,
Shift applies the mean-shift baseline, and Gauss PT fits Gaussian parameters from samples and
applies closed-form parallel transport. Lower is better; bold marks the best method at each step
and underlining marks the second-best.
The second takeaway that we wish to convey is the apparent poor performance of our method
when the Helmholtz projection is included. We attribute this to the nonparametric rate of conver-
gence associated with RKHS methods, which indicates that the risk of our estimator likely depends
exponentially on d. This rate is slow enough to explain the poor performance of WPT with the
Helmholtz projection even when d is fairly small.
5.2
Real Data: Genomics
We now evaluate our method on two publicly available genomics datasets. Specifically, we apply
our method to the dataset of human and chimp cerebral organoid cells undergoing developmental
24
changes (Kanton et al., 2019), and a dataset of microglial cells from mice evolving over time in
response to spared nerve injury (SNI) (Tansley et al., 2022). In both datasets, we have access to
per-cell gene counts via single-cell transcriptomics – as a result, we regard each cell x as a point in
Rd, with d being the total number of genes, where each coordinate quantifies the extent to which
the cell expresses that gene. We regard a population of cells {x1, . . . , xn} at a single time point
as an empirical measure over Rd, assigning a mass of 1/n to each datapoint. These time-varying
empirical measures will be the object of study in our subsequent experiments.
npcs
mid (∼day 65)
late (∼day 110)
WPT−
Mean-shift
WPT−
Mean-shift
2
1.262
1.230
0.817
1.367
3
1.262
1.298
0.833
1.433
5
1.294
1.376
0.896
1.621
7
1.389
1.474
1.121
1.707
10
1.537
1.578
1.428
1.851
15
1.712
1.776
1.683
2.047
20
1.822
1.981
1.897
2.211
Table 2: W2 between predicted and observed human organoid gene expressions per non-initial time
point for WPT−and mean-shift baseline as a function of the number of principal components used.
Before proceeding, we remark on a key subtlety that we ask the reader to keep in mind: in the
following experiments, our goal is to verify whether or not these cellular systems develop in parallel
in the Wasserstein sense when subjected to similar biological dynamics. We are not making any
causal claims – instead, we want these experiments to provide evidence that Wasserstein parallel
trends is a reasonable assumption to adopt in genomics. We hope that this would provide support for
applying our method to biological systems to make meaningful causal claims about counterfactual
dynamics downstream.
npcs
day 14
5 months
WPT−
Mean-shift
WPT−
Mean-shift
2
0.489
0.601
0.600
0.575
3
0.799
0.719
0.574
0.613
5
0.893
0.854
0.971
1.120
7
1.090
1.053
1.146
1.228
10
1.346
1.354
1.434
1.507
15
1.630
1.616
1.728
1.742
20
1.916
1.883
1.980
1.984
(a) Sham
npcs
day 14
5 months
WPT−
Mean-shift
WPT−
Mean-shift
2
0.711
0.714
0.879
0.838
3
0.928
0.998
0.875
0.893
5
1.113
1.176
1.126
1.355
7
1.277
1.271
1.283
1.441
10
1.458
1.429
1.488
1.589
15
1.703
1.683
1.785
1.821
20
1.930
1.905
2.021
2.026
(b) SNI
Table 3: W2 between predicted and observed male microglial gene expressions per non-initial
timepoint for WPT−and mean-shift baseline as a function of the number of principal components
used.
Having established the motivation for this section, we can now apply Algorithm 2 to the dataset
of cerebral organoids from Kanton et al. (2019). In particular, we use WPT to impute the dynamics
of the chimp organoids over time onto the human organoid initial conditions – we then compute the
Wasserstein distance between the imputed point clouds and the observed human organoid point
25
Figure 7: UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018) visualizations of chimp (top row), predicted human (middle
row) and observed human (bottom row) organoid dynamics over time using npcs = 15.
26
Figure 8: UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018) visualizations of female (top row), predicted male (middle
row) and observed male (bottom row) microglial dynamics over time using npcs = 15. The panel
on the left uses only cells from the untreated (sham) group, while the panel on the right uses only
cells from the treated (SNI) group.
clouds and compare the distances with those obtained when using the mean-shift baseline. Since
there is no “treatment” in this setup, this experiment is not causal and we are not predicting
a counterfactual.
However, if the observed dynamics were a precursor to a treatment period,
this experiment described would be a reasonable justification for the Wasserstein parallel trends
assumption.
We provide the Wasserstein distances between predicted and true point clouds in Table 2, while
we provide UMAP visualizations of the predicted dynamics produced by our method in Figure 7
(McInnes et al., 2018). As is standard in genomics, we project the datasets onto their top npcs
principal components, as the raw dataset contains on the order of 20000 genes, most of which
are not expressed. To get a sense of the dependence of the performance of our method on the
dimension, we vary npcs from 2 to 20 and include the errors for each in Table 2. We find that our
method produces dynamics that are closer in Wasserstein distance to the truth than the dynamics
produced by the mean-shift baseline in all but one scenario. Since Theorem 4.6 indicates that
Wasserstein parallel transport gives rise to parallel trends of the means, we consider this strong
evidence to suggest that the change in the shape of point clouds captured by Wasserstein parallel
trends is indeed biologically meaningful.
To provide further support for this notion, we apply the same experiment to a dataset of gene
expression of microglial cells over time from Tansley et al. (2022). In this experiment, we predict the
evolution of microglial cells through gene expression space in males from the evolution in females.
Since the study from which this data was obtained addresses a causal question – how microglial gene
expression changes in the presence of spared nerve injury (SNI) – we run the experiment separately
for the control (called “sham”) and the SNI group. We provide the Wasserstein distances between
predicted point clouds and observed point clouds for our method and the mean shift baseline in
Table 3, and we provide a visualization of the predictions produced by our method in Figure 8. In
27
this dataset we find that the mean-shift method closer in performance to our method than we saw
in the dataset of cerebral organoids. With that said, this seems to hold only for the first predicted
time step – for the second predicted time step we see that our method consistently outperforms
the mean shift baseline.
6
Conclusion
In this work we proposed a conceptual framework for formalizing the notion of distribution-level
parallel dynamics through the mechanism of parallel transport on the space of probability measures
endowed with optimal transport geometry. In particular, we proposed a tractable procedure for
approximating parallel transport on the space of probability measures over a Riemannian manifold
M. We also instantiated the method for M = Rd in an algorithm to predict the dynamics of one
system of time-evolving measures from another under the assumption of Wasserstein parallel trends,
and we separately derived closed form expressions of Wasserstein parallel transport for Gaussian
measures. Finally, we evaluated our parallel transport approximation scheme in simulation using
the ground truth Gaussian parallel transport, and we deployed our dynamics prediction procedure
on real genomics datasets of time-evolving cellular systems.
While our work proposes and deploys a new procedure for imputing the dynamics of one sta-
tistical system onto another, there are many open questions that we have left unaddressed. In
particular, we believe that a fruitful direction of future study would be an exploration of the statis-
tical properties of Wasserstein parallel transport and, in turn, dynamics prediction with Wasserstein
parallel transport. Understanding the rates of convergence, optimality properties and limiting laws
would enable rigorous statistical inferences to be made when this framework is applied in practice.
We believe this would be especially useful for Difference-in-Differences, as it would allow one to per-
form hypothesis testing on observed data from pretreatment periods to assess whether Wasserstein
parallel trends is a reasonable assumption to adopt.
In concurrent work, we have also been developing the theory of parallel transport on the space of
non-negative Radon measures using Hellinger-Kantorovich geometry – such a theory would allow for
a rigorous notion of parallel trends on the space of measures with total mass that is allowed to vary.
This concurrent work has relied heavily on the results derived in this paper, as one can construct an
equivalence (in a delicate sense) between Hellinger-Kantorovich geometry on Rd and Wasserstein
geometry on a metric cone of Rd (Liero et al., 2016, 2018). We believe that the completion of
this theory of unbalanced parallel transport would be especially applicable to genomics, as cellular
systems experience mass growth and shrinkage over time. As with Wasserstein parallel transport,
we believe that an abundance of interesting statistical questions would follow.
28
References
A. Abadie. Semiparametric difference-in-differences estimators. The review of economic studies, 72
(1):1–19, 2005.
A. Abadie, A. Diamond, and J. Hainmueller.
Synthetic control methods for comparative case
studies: Estimating the effect of california’s tobacco control program. Journal of the American
statistical Association, 105(490):493–505, 2010.
L. Ambrosio and N. Gigli. Construction of the parallel transport in the wasserstein space. 2008.
L. Ambrosio and N. Gigli. A user’s guide to optimal transport. In Modelling and Optimisation of
Flows on Networks: Cetraro, Italy 2009, Editors: Benedetto Piccoli, Michel Rascle, pages 1–155.
Springer, 2012.
L. Ambrosio, N. Gigli, and G. Savar´e. Gradient flows: in metric spaces and in the space of probability
measures. Springer, 2005.
N. Aronszajn. Theory of reproducing kernels. Transactions of the American mathematical society,
68(3):337–404, 1950.
O. Ashenfelter and D. Card. Using the longitudinal structure of earnings to estimate the effect of
training programs. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 67(4):648–660, 1985.
S. Athey and G. W. Imbens.
Identification and inference in nonlinear difference-in-differences
models. Econometrica, 74(2):431–497, 2006.
C. Bunne, S. G. Stark, G. Gut, J. S. Del Castillo, M. Levesque, K.-V. Lehmann, L. Pelkmans,
A. Krause, and G. R¨atsch.
Learning single-cell perturbation responses using neural optimal
transport. Nature methods, 20(11):1759–1768, 2023.
C. Bunne, G. Schiebinger, A. Krause, A. Regev, and M. Cuturi. Optimal transport for single-cell
and spatial omics. Nature Reviews Methods Primers, 4(1):58, 2024.
B. Callaway and T. Li. Quantile treatment effects in difference in differences models with panel
data. Quantitative Economics, 10(4):1579–1618, 2019.
D. Card and A. B. Krueger. Minimum wages and employment: A case study of the fast-food
lndustry in new jersey and pennsylvania. The American Economic Review, 84(4):772–793, 1994.
B. Casselman.
Fourier series and elliptic regularity.
Essay in analysis, University of British
Columbia, 2016. URL https://personal.math.ubc.ca/~cass/research/pdf/FS.pdf. Last
revised March 10, 2016.
Y. Chen, Z. Lin, and H.-G. M¨uller. Wasserstein regression. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 118(542):869–882, 2023.
S. Chewi, J. Niles-Weed, and P. Rigollet.
Statistical optimal transport, 2024.
URL https://
arxiv.org/abs/2407.18163.
D. Cioranescu and P. Donato. An introduction to homogenization. Oxford university press, 1999.
J. Clancy. Interpolating Spline Curves of Measures. PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology, 2021.
29
N. Courty, R. Flamary, D. Tuia, and A. Rakotomamonjy. Optimal transport for domain adaptation.
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 39(9):1853–1865, 2016.
E. De Vito, L. Rosasco, A. Caponnetto, U. De Giovannini, F. Odone, and P. Bartlett. Learning
from examples as an inverse problem. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6(5), 2005.
N. Deb, P. Ghosal, and B. Sen.
Rates of estimation of optimal transport maps using plug-in
estimators via barycentric projections. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
29736–29753, 2021.
M. P. Do Carmo. Differential geometry of curves and surfaces: revised and updated second edition.
Courier Dover Publications, 2016.
S. Dyatlov. Lecture notes for 18.155: Distributions, elliptic regularity, and applications, Dec. 2022.
URL https://math.mit.edu/~dyatlov/18.155/155-notes.pdf. MIT lecture notes.
X. Emery, E. Porcu, and M. Bevilacqua. Towards unified native spaces in kernel methods. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 26(267):1–35, 2025.
L. C. Evans. Partial differential equations, volume 19. American mathematical society, 2022.
B. Ghojogh, A. Ghodsi, F. Karray, and M. Crowley. Reproducing kernel hilbert space, mercer’s
theorem, eigenfunctions, nystr\” om method, and use of kernels in machine learning: Tutorial
and survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08443, 2021.
N. Gigli. Second Order Analysis on P2(M). American Mathematical Soc., 2012.
F. Gunsilius, M. H. Hsieh, and M. J. Lee. Tangential wasserstein projections. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 25(69):1–41, 2024.
F. F. Gunsilius. Distributional synthetic controls. Econometrica, 91(3):1105–1117, 2023.
F. F. Gunsilius. A primer on optimal transport for causal inference with observational data. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.07811, 2025.
S. Kanton, M. J. Boyle, Z. He, M. Santel, A. Weigert, F. Sanch´ıs-Calleja, P. Guijarro, L. Sidow,
J. S. Fleck, D. Han, et al. Organoid single-cell genomic atlas uncovers human-specific features of
brain development. Nature, 574(7778):418–422, 2019.
H. Lavenant, S. Zhang, Y.-H. Kim, G. Schiebinger, et al. Toward a mathematical theory of trajec-
tory inference. The Annals of Applied Probability, 34(1A):428–500, 2024.
J. M. Lee. Introduction to Riemannian manifolds, volume 2. Springer, 2018.
M. Liero, A. Mielke, and G. Savar´e. Optimal transport in competition with reaction: The hellinger–
kantorovich distance and geodesic curves. SIAM Journal on Mathematical Analysis, 48(4):2869–
2911, 2016.
M. Liero, A. Mielke, and G. Savar´e. Optimal entropy-transport problems and a new hellinger–
kantorovich distance between positive measures.
Inventiones mathematicae, 211(3):969–1117,
2018.
J. Lott.
Some geometric calculations on wasserstein space.
Communications in Mathematical
Physics, 277:423–437, 2008.
30
M. Louis, B. Charlier, P. Jusselin, S. Pal, and S. Durrleman. A fanning scheme for the parallel
transport along geodesics on riemannian manifolds. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis, 56
(4):2563–2584, 2018.
M. D. Luecken, M. B¨uttner, K. Chaichoompu, A. Danese, M. Interlandi, M. F. Mueller, D. C.
Strobl, L. Zappia, M. Dugas, M. Colom´e-Tatch´e, and F. J. Theis. Benchmarking atlas-level data
integration in single-cell genomics. Nature Methods, 19(1):41–50, 2022.
T. Manole, S. Balakrishnan, J. Niles-Weed, and L. Wasserman. Central limit theorems for smooth
optimal transport maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.12407, 2023.
T. Manole, S. Balakrishnan, J. Niles-Weed, and L. Wasserman. Plugin estimation of smooth optimal
transport maps. The Annals of Statistics, 52(3):966–998, 2024.
B. Mat´ern. Spatial variation. stochastic models and their application to some problems in forest
surveys and other sampling investigations. 1960.
R. J. McCann. Polar factorization of maps on riemannian manifolds. Geometric & Functional
Analysis GAFA, 11(3):589–608, 2001.
L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and projection for
dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426, 2018.
F. Otto. The geometry of dissipative evolution equations: the porous medium equation. 2001.
A. Petersen and H.-G. M¨uller. Wasserstein covariance for multiple random densities. Biometrika,
106(2):339–351, 2019.
P. Petersen. Riemannian geometry. Springer, 2006.
J. Roth, P. H. Sant’Anna, A. Bilinski, and J. Poe. What’s trending in difference-in-differences? a
synthesis of the recent econometrics literature. Journal of econometrics, 235(2):2218–2244, 2023.
W. Rudin. Functional Analysis. International series in pure and applied mathematics. McGraw-Hill,
1991. ISBN 9780070542365. URL https://books.google.com/books?id=Sh_vAAAAMAAJ.
F. Santambrogio. Optimal transport for applied mathematicians. 2015.
G. Schiebinger. Reconstructing developmental landscapes and trajectories from single-cell data.
Current Opinion in Systems Biology, 27:100351, 2021.
G. Schiebinger, J. Shu, M. Tabaka, B. Cleary, V. Subramanian, A. Solomon, J. Gould, S. Liu,
S. Lin, P. Berube, et al.
Optimal-transport analysis of single-cell gene expression identifies
developmental trajectories in reprogramming. Cell, 176(4):928–943, 2019.
S. Shkoller. Notes on Lp and sobolev spaces, Mar. 2009. URL https://www.math.ucdavis.edu/
~hunter/m218a_09/Lp_and_Sobolev_notes.pdf. Lecture notes, dated March 19, 2009.
T. Sofer, D. B. Richardson, E. Colicino, J. Schwartz, and E. J. T. Tchetgen. On negative outcome
control of unobserved confounding as a generalization of difference-in-differences.
Statistical
Science, 31(3):348–361, 2016. ISSN 08834237, 21688745. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/
24780857.
31
A. Takatsu. Wasserstein geometry of Gaussian measures. Osaka Journal of Mathematics, 48(4):
1005 – 1026, 2011.
S. Tansley, S. Uttam, A. Ure˜na Guzm´an, M. Yaqubi, A. Pacis, M. Parisien, H. Deamond, C. Wong,
O. Rabau, N. Brown, et al. Single-cell rna sequencing reveals time-and sex-specific responses of
mouse spinal cord microglia to peripheral nerve injury and links apoe to chronic pain. Nature
communications, 13(1):843, 2022.
W. Torous, F. Gunsilius, and P. Rigollet. An optimal transport approach to estimating causal
effects via nonlinear difference-in-differences. Journal of Causal Inference, 12(1):20230004, 2024.
H. T. N. Tran, K. S. Ang, M. Chevrier, X. Zhang, N. Y. S. Lee, M. Goh, and J. Chen. A benchmark
of batch-effect correction methods for single-cell RNA sequencing data. Genome Biology, 21(1):
12, 2020.
N. S. Trudinger. A note on global regularity in optimal transportion. Bulletin of Mathematical
Sciences, 3(3):551–557, 2013.
C. Villani et al. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2009.
D.-X. Zhou. Derivative reproducing properties for kernel methods in learning theory. Journal of
computational and Applied Mathematics, 220(1-2):456–463, 2008.
Y. Zhou, D. Kurisu, T. Otsu, and H.-G. M¨uller. Geodesic difference-in-differences. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.17436, 2025.
A
Stability Theory for Wasserstein Parallel Transport
For the stability theory in this work, we choose to take M = Td, where Td = Rd/Zd is the flat
torus. This choice isn’t uncommon in optimal transport theory, as it avoids extensive boundary
issues that arise in the PDE machinery underpinning optimal transport (see Manole et al. (2023),
for instance). Thus, throughout this section of the appendix, we adopt the following definitions.
For each absolutely continuous measure µ = ρ dx ∈P2(Td), we define
TµP2(Td) = {∇φ : φ ∈C∞(Td)}
L2(µ),
Πµ : L2(µ; Rd) →TµP2(Td)
where C∞(Td) is the space of smooth periodic functions over Td. We also identify Πµz with its
unique representative ∇ψ on Td, where ψ ∈H1(Td) solves
Z
Td ρ ⟨∇ψ, ∇ξ⟩dx =
Z
Td ρ ⟨z, ∇ξ⟩dx
∀ξ ∈H1(Td).
We show this identification rigorously below. We note that this identification allows us to represent
projected fields as gradients of Sobolev functions; in the original tangent space definition, the L2(µ)
closure prevents one from doing so.
Lemma A.1 (Tangent space realization). Let µ be a probability measure on Td that admits a
Lebesgue density ρ such that 0 < λ ≤ρ(x) ≤Λ < ∞for a.e. x ∈Td, and define
TµP2(Td) = {∇φ : φ ∈C∞(Td)}
L2(µ).
32
Then
TµP2(Td) = {∇ψ : ψ ∈H1(Td)}.
In particular, every u ∈TµP2(Td) admits a representative of the form u = ∇ψ on Td for some
ψ ∈H1(Td), where ψ is unique up to an additive constant.
Proof. Because 0 < λ ≤ρ ≤Λ a.e. on Td, the norms ∥· ∥L2(µ) and ∥· ∥L2(Td) are equivalent. Thus,
it suffices to prove that
{∇φ : φ ∈C∞(Td)}
L2(Td) = {∇ψ : ψ ∈H1(Td)}.
To do so, we’ll start by showing the inclusion ⊆. Let φn be a sequence of functions in C∞(Td)
such that ∇φn →u in L2(Td; Rd) for some u ∈L2(Td; Rd). We will show that u is necessarily a
gradient of a Sobolev function. To do so, set
˜φn ≜φn −
Z
Td φn(x) dx
as a de-meaned instance of φn. Observe that
R
Td ˜φn dx = 0, and ∇˜φn = ∇φn. By the Poincar´e-
Wirtinger inequality (Cioranescu and Donato, 1999),
∥˜φn −˜φm∥L2(Td) ≤Cp∥∇˜φn −∇˜φm∥L2(Td).
Thus,
∥˜φn −˜φm∥H1(Td) ≤(1 + Cp)∥∇φn −∇φm∥L2(Td).
Since ∇φn is convergent in L2(Td; Rd) it is Cauchy. By the inequality above, we know that ˜φn must
then be Cauchy in H1(Td). Since H1(Td) is a Banach space, we know there exists a ψ ∈H1(Td)
such that ˜φn →ψ in H1(Td). This convergence in a Sobolev sense implies that ∇˜φn = ∇φn →∇ψ
in L2(Td). Since ∇φn →u we conclude that u = ∇ψ. Now we will show the reverse inclusion ⊇.
Let ψ ∈H1(Td). Since C∞(Td) is dense in H1(Td), we know there exists a sequence φn ∈C∞(Td)
such that φn →ψ in H1(Td). This implies that ∇φn →∇ψ in L2(Td; Rd). Thus, ∇ψ is in the
L2(Td) closure of {∇φ : φ ∈C∞(Td)}. To establish the uniqueness up to an additive constant of
ψ, observe the following: if ∇ψ1 = ∇ψ2 ∈L2(µ), then ψ1 −ψ2 is constant a.e. on Td. Thus the
potential ψ is unique up to an additive constant.
Theorem A.2 (Projection realization). Let µ be a probability measure on Td that admits a Lebesgue
density ρ such that 0 < λ ≤ρ(x) ≤Λ < ∞for a.e. x ∈Td, and let
Πµ : L2(µ; Rd) −→{∇φ : φ ∈C∞(Td)}
L2(µ)
denote the orthogonal projection onto the Wasserstein tangent space on Td. Then for every element
z ∈L2(µ; Rd) there exists a unique ψ ∈H1(Td) such that
R
Td ψ dx = 0, Πµz = ∇ψ ∈L2(µ; Rd),
and
Z
Td ρ ⟨∇ψ, ∇ξ⟩dx =
Z
Td ρ ⟨z, ∇ξ⟩dx
for all ξ ∈H1(Td).
33
Proof. Define
H1
⋄(Td) ≜

ξ ∈H1(Td) :
Z
Td ξ dx = 0

.
Since H1
⋄(Td) is a subspace of H1(Td), it inherits the same norm. In this proof, our goal will be to
apply the Lax-Milgram theorem (Theorem A.10) with the Hilbert space H1
⋄(Td) to establish the
uniqueness of ψ ∈H1
⋄(Td). To do so, define the functionals
B(ψ, ξ) ≜
Z
Td ρ ⟨∇ψ, ∇ξ⟩dx,
and
f(ξ) ≜
Z
Td ρ ⟨z, ∇ξ⟩dx.
To apply the Lax-Milgram theorem, we need to show that (1) the functional B is upper bounded
by a quantity proportional to the product of the norms of its arguments, (2) lower bounded by
a quantity proportional to the squared norm of its first argument, and (3) f is a bounded linear
functional on H1(Td). We will start by showing (1). Using the density bounds and Cauchy-Schwartz,
|B(ψ, ξ)| ≤Λ∥∇ψ∥L2(Td)∥∇ξ∥L2(Td) ≤Λ∥ψ∥H1(Td)∥ξ∥H1(Td).
This proves (1). Applying the density lower bound and the Poincar´e-Wirtinger inequality (Cio-
ranescu and Donato, 1999) yields,
|B(ψ, ψ)| ≥λ∥∇ψ∥2
L2(Td) ≥C−2
p λ∥ψ∥2
L2(Td).
Note that this step used the fact that ψ necessarily has mean zero. This bound implies,
∥ψ∥2
H1(Td) = ∥ψ∥2
L2(Td) + ∥∇ψ∥2
L2(Td) ≤
 1 + C2
p

∥∇ψ∥2
L2(Td)
which further implies
|B(ψ, ψ)| ≥
λ
(1 + C2p)∥ψ∥2
H1(Td)
proving (2). For (3), observe that f(·) = ⟨z, ∇(·)⟩Td is a linear functional. Applying the density
bound ρ ≤Λ again yields
|f(ξ)| ≤Λ∥z∥L2(Td)∥∇ξ∥L2(Td) ≤Λ∥z∥L2(Td)∥ξ∥H1(Td).
Thus, f is a bounded linear functional.
Now we can apply the Lax-Milgram theorem (Theo-
rem A.10) to obtain the unique ψ ∈H1
⋄(Td) such that
Z
Td ρ ⟨∇ψ, ∇ξ⟩dx =
Z
Td ρ ⟨z, ∇ξ⟩dx
for all ξ ∈H1
⋄(Td). Note that ∇ξ is unchanged when ξ is changed by an additive constant, so this
statement can be upgraded to all ξ ∈H1(Td). By Lemma A.1, we know that ∇ψ ∈TµP2(Td). To
finish the proof, we now need to show that ∇ψ is indeed the orthogonal projection of z ∈L2(µ; Rd)
onto TµP2(Td). Let φ ∈C∞(Td). Since φ is also in H1(Td), we can apply the variational identity
above to say
Z
Td ρ ⟨z −∇ψ, ∇φ⟩dx = 0.
This is equivalent to saying ⟨z −∇ψ, ∇φ⟩L2(µ) = 0 for all φ ∈C∞(Td), which clearly implies that
z −∇ψ is orthogonal to gradients C∞(Td). This also renders z −∇ψ orthogonal to the L2(µ)
closure of the gradients, TµP2(Td). Thus, Πµz = ∇ψ, which proves the claim.
34
A.1
The Stability Theorem
In this section we state and prove our stability theorem (Theorem A.3), which we leverage to obtain
error bounds for Algorithm 2. We collect all supplementary results for this stability theorem in
Section A.2.
Theorem A.3 (Stability of Wasserstein parallel transport). Let (ν, µ, µ′) be a triple in the admis-
sible class C, and let v ∈TνP2(Td). Suppose that the Wasserstein geodesics (µt)t∈[0,1], (µ′
t)t∈[0,1]
from ν to µ and from ν to µ′ admit Lebesgue densities ρt, ρ′
t and have tangent velocity fields ϕt, ϕ′
t,
such that:
1. Uniform density bounds. There exist constants 0 < λ ≤Λ < ∞such that for all t ∈[0, 1],
λ ≤ρt(x), ρ′
t(x) ≤Λ
for a.e. x ∈Td.
2. H1-propagation of parallel fields. There exists Cpar > 0 such that for all t ∈[0, 1],
∥wt∥H1(ν) + ∥w′
t∥H1(ν) ≤Cpar∥v∥H1(ν)
where wt = PTν→µt(v) and w′
t = PTν→µ′
t(v).
3. Lipschitz stability of geodesic velocities. There exists Cvel > 0 such that for all t ∈[0, 1],
∥∇ϕt −∇ϕ′
t∥L∞(Td) ≤Cvel W2(µ, µ′).
4. Lipschitz stability of densities. There exist constants CL > 0, CW > 0 such that for all
t ∈[0, 1],
∥ρt −ρ′
t∥L∞(Td) ≤CL W2(µ, µ′),
and
∥ρt −ρ′
t∥W 1,∞(Td) ≤CW W2(µ, µ′).
5. Lipschitz stability of the weighted Helmholtz projection. There exist constants CΠ,0, CΠ,1 >
0 such that for all t ∈[0, 1] and every z ∈L2(ν; Rd),
∥Πµt(z) −Πµ′
t(z)∥L2(ν) ≤CΠ,0 ∥ρt −ρ′
t∥L∞(Td) ∥z∥L2(ν).
Moreover, for all w ∈H1(ν; Rd)
∥Πµt(w) −Πµ′
t(w)∥H1(ν) ≤CΠ,1 ∥ρt −ρ′
t∥W 1,∞(Td) ∥w∥H1(ν).
6. Uniform W 1,∞control of geodesic velocities. There exists M < ∞such that
sup
t∈[0,1]

∥∇ϕt∥W 1,∞(Td) + ∥∇ϕ′
t∥W 1,∞(Td)

≤M.
7. Time regularity of the weighted Helmholtz projection. For every absolutely continuous
curve z ∈AC([0, 1]; L2(Td; Rd)), the curve t 7→Πµtzt also belongs to AC([0, 1]; L2(ν; Rd).
Moreover, for a.e. t ∈(0, 1) we define
(∂tΠµt)(zt) ≜∂t(Πµtzt) −Πµt(∂tzt)
and this quantity satisfies the bound
(∂tΠµt)(zt)

L2(ν) ≤C ˙Π∥zt∥L2(ν).
35
Then there exists a constant CWPT > 0, depending only on the constants above, such that for every
v ∈TνP2(Td) ∩H1(ν; Rd),
∥PTν→µ(v) −PTν→µ′(v)∥L2(ν) ≤CWPT ∥v∥H1(ν) W2(µ, µ′).
By norm compatibility, the same bound holds in L2(µ) up to a multiplicative constant depending
only on λ, Λ.
Proof.
Note that the uniform density bounds ensure that the normed spaces induced by each
measure and any Wasserstein interpolants thereof are uniformly norm-equivalent. We will leverage
this property extensively in this proof. Define the difference field et = wt −w′
t, which is well defined
pointwise on Td despite the fact that wt and w′
t live in different Wasserstein tangent spaces. By
Proposition 3.2,
Πµt(∂tet) = Πµt(∂twt) −Πµt(∂tw′
t)
= −Πµt(∇wt∇ϕt) −Πµt(∂tw′
t)
= −Πµt(∇wt∇ϕt) + Πµ′
t(∇w′
t∇ϕ′
t) + (Πµ′
t −Πµt)(∂tw′
t).
Now adding and subtracting Πµt(∇w′
t∇ϕt) gives
Πµt(∂tet) = −Πµt(∇et∇ϕt) −Πµt(∇w′
t∇(ϕt −ϕ′
t)) −(Πµt −Πµ′
t)(∂tw′
t + ∇w′
t∇ϕ′
t).
(12)
We will return to this expression shortly.
First, define ηt = Πµtet = wt −Πµt(w′
t) and rt =
(I −Πµt)(et), and observe that et = ηt + rt. We will first control rt,
rt = (I −Πµt)(wt −w′
t)
= (wt −w′
t) −Πµt(wt −w′
t)
= Πµtwt −Πµ′
tw′
t −Πµtwt + Πµtw′
t
= (Πµt −Πµ′
t)(w′
t)
since wt = Πµtwt and w′
t = Πµ′
tw′
t. By uniform norm equivalence of all measures of interest and
assumptions 2, 4 and 5,
∥rt∥L2(µt) ≲CΠ,0∥ρt −ρ′
t∥L∞(Td)∥w′
t∥L2(ν)
≤CΠ,0CLCpar∥v∥H1(ν)W2(µ, µ′).
Moreover, the second part of assumption 5 implies
∥rt∥H1(µt) ≲CΠ,1CW Cpar∥v∥H1(ν)W2(µ, µ′).
(13)
Since ηt = Πµtet, assumption 7 gives
∂tηt = (∂tΠµt)(et) + Πµt(∂tet).
Projecting onto the tangent space at µt again yields
Πµt(∂tηt) = Πµt((∂tΠµt)(et)) + Πµt(∂tet).
Plugging in Equation (12) and using the fact that et = ηt + rt yields
Πµt(∂tηt) = −Πµt(∇ηt∇ϕt) + gt
(14)
36
where
gt = −Πµt(∇rt∇ϕt)−Πµt(∇w′
t∇(ϕt −ϕ′
t))−(Πµt −Πµ′
t)(∂tw′
t +∇w′
t∇ϕ′
t)+Πµt((∂tΠµt)(et)). (15)
Now we will show that
1
2
d
dt∥ηt∥2
L2(µt) = ⟨ηt, gt⟩L2(µt).
We have
∥ηt∥2
L2(µt) =
Z
Td ∥ηt(x)∥2
2dρt(x).
Taking the time derivative yields
1
2
d
dt∥ηt∥2
L2(µt) =
Z
Td⟨ηt(x), d
dtηt(x)⟩dρt(x) + 1
2
Z
Td ∥ηt∥2
2(∂tρt(x)) dx
By the continuity equation along the geodesic (µt), we know that ∂tρt = −∇· (ρt∇ϕt) and thus
1
2
d
dt∥ηt∥2
L2(µt) =
Z
Td⟨ηt(x), d
dtηt(x)⟩dρt(x) −1
2
Z
Td ∥ηt∥2
2∇· (ρt(x)∇ϕt(x)) dx.
Applying integration by parts to the second term indicates that
1
2
Z
Td ∥ηt∥2
2∇· (ρt(x)∇ϕt(x)) dx =
Z
Td⟨ηt, ∇ηt∇ϕt(x)⟩dρt(x).
Note that no boundary term appears in the integration by parts formula as Td is boundaryless.
Plugging back in, we see that
1
2
d
dt∥ηt∥2
L2(µt) = ⟨ηt, ∂tηt⟩L2(µt) + ⟨ηt, ∇ηt∇ϕt⟩L2(µt) = ⟨ηt, ∂tηt + ∇ηt∇ϕt⟩L2(µt).
Now let at = ∂tηt+∇ηt∇ϕt, and recall from Equation (14) that Πµt(at) = gt. Since ηt ∈TµtP2(Td),
we know that for any b ∈L2(µt; Rd), ⟨ηt, bt⟩L2(µt) = ⟨ηt, Πµtbt⟩L2(µt). Thus, we indeed see that
1
2
d
dt∥ηt∥2
L2(µt) = ⟨ηt, gt⟩L2(µt)
Now we will bound the four contributions to gt. For the first term of gt, using norm equivalence,
assumption 6 and the Sobolev norm bound on rt obtained earlier yields
∥Πµt(∇rt∇ϕt)∥L2(µt) ≲∥∇rt∇ϕt∥L2(ν)
≤∥∇ϕt∥W 1,∞(Td)∥rt∥H1(ν)
≤MCΠ,1CW Cpar∥v∥H1(ν)W2(µ, µ′).
For the second term, due to assumptions 2 and 3, we have
∥Πµt(∇w′
t∇(ϕt −ϕ′
t))∥L2(µt) ≲∥∇w′
t∥L2(ν)∥∇ϕt −∇ϕ′
t∥L∞(Td) ≤CparCvel∥v∥H1(ν)W2(µ, µ′).
For the third term, applying assumption 5 gives
(Πµt −Πµ′
t)(∂tw′
t + ∇w′
t∇ϕ′
t)

L2(µt) ≲CΠ,0∥ρt −ρ′
t∥L∞(Td)∥∂tw′
t + ∇w′
t∇ϕ′
t∥L2(ν).
37
Now let h′
t ≜∂tw′
t + ∇w′
t∇ϕ′
t. Since w′
t = Πµ′
tw′
t, applying assumption 7 and Corollary A.9 yields
∂tw′
t = Πµ′
t(∂tw′
t) + (∂tΠµ′
t)(w′
t).
Since w′
t is assumed to be parallel along µ′
t, Πµ′
t(∂tw′
t) = −Πµ′
t(∇w′
t∇ϕ′
t). Thus,
h′
t = (∂tΠµ′
t)(w′
t) + (id −Πµ′
t)(∇w′
t∇ϕ′
t).
Since Πµ′
t is an orthogonal projection
∥h′
t∥L2(ν) ≤∥(∂tΠµ′
t)(w′
t)∥L2(ν) + ∥(id −Πµ′
t)(∇w′
t∇ϕ′
t)∥L2(ν)
≤C ˙Π∥w′
t∥L2(ν) + ∥∇w′
t∥L2(ν)∥∇ϕ′
t∥W 1,∞(Td)
≤C ˙Π∥w′
t∥H1(ν) + M∥w′
t∥H1(ν)
≲∥v∥H1(ν).
Combining this with assumption 4 yields
(Πµt −Πµ′
t)(∂tw′
t + ∇w′
t∇ϕ′
t)

L2(µt) ≲∥v∥H1(ν)W2(µ, µ′).
For the final term, assumption 7, Corollary A.9 and the bound on the L2(ν) norm of rt implies
∥Πµt((∂tΠµt)et)∥L2(µt) ≲C ˙Π∥ηt + rt∥L2(ν) ≲C ˙Π(∥ηt∥L2(µt) + CΠ,0CLCpar∥v∥H1(ν)W2(µ, µ′)).
Combining the bounds for all terms and applying Cauchy-Schwartz yields
1
2
d
dt∥ηt∥2
L2(µt) ≤C1∥ηt∥2
L2(µt) + C2∥v∥H1(ν)∥ηt∥L2(µt)W2(µ, µ′)
for some C1 and C2 depending only on theorem constants. For all t such that ηt ̸= 0 we can cancel
∥ηt∥L2(µt) and say
d
dt∥ηt∥L2(µt) ≤C1∥ηt∥L2(µt) + C2∥v∥H1(ν)W2(µ, µ′).
Since η0 ≡0 we can apply Gr¨onwall’s inequality to say ∥ηt∥L2(µt) ≤C3∥v∥H1(ν)W2(µ, µ′) for some
C3 dependent only on theorem constants. Finally, we have
∥et∥L2(µt) ≤∥ηt∥L2(µt) + ∥rt∥L2(µt) ≤CWPT∥v∥H1(ν)W2(µ, µ′).
Since et = wt −w′
t = PTν→µt(v) −PTν→µ′
t(v), and since the spaces under µt, µ, ν are all norm-
equivalent, the proof is complete.
Lemma A.4. Under Assumption 4.1, the hypotheses of Theorem A.3 are satisfied.
Proof. We will go through each assumption and show that it follows from an assumption in As-
sumption 4.1. Assumption 1 is stated exactly in (A.1). Assumption 2 follows from Proposition A.8
coupled with (A.1) and (A.3). Assumptions 3 and 4 are stated directly in (A.2). Assumption
5 is guaranteed by Lemma A.5 and Lemma A.6. Assumption 6 is stated directly in (A.3), and
assumption 7 is guaranteed by (A.1) and Lemma A.7.
38
A.2
Supplementary Results
Lemma A.5 (Lipschitz stability of weighted Helmholtz projection in L2). Let ρ, ρ′ satisfy
0 < λ ≤ρ(x), ρ′(x) ≤Λ < ∞
a.e. on Td.
Let Πρ, Πρ′ denote the weighted Helmholtz projections onto the L2(ρ)- and L2(ρ′)-closures of gradient
fields, respectively. Then there exists a constant CΠ,0 = C(λ, Λ) such that for every z ∈L2(Td; Rd),
∥Πρz −Πρ′z∥L2(Td) ≤CΠ,0 ∥ρ −ρ′∥L∞(Td) ∥z∥L2(Td).
If, in addition, the reference measure ν = ρνdx satisfies 0 < λν ≤ρν ≤Λν < ∞, then equivalently
∥Πρz −Πρ′z∥L2(ν) ≤CΠ,0 ∥ρ −ρ′∥L∞(Td) ∥z∥L2(ν).
Proof. Let u ≜Πρz and let u′ ≜Πρ′z and write u = ∇ψ, u′ = ∇ψ′, and w = u −u′ (which can be
done due to Theorem A.2). Recall that the norm equivalence of the L2(ρ) and L2(ρ′) spaces ensure
that the image spaces of the projections necessarily coincide. The first order conditions of the two
Helmholtz projections are
Z
Td⟨u, ∇ξ⟩dρ =
Z
Td⟨z, ∇ξ⟩dρ
Z
Td⟨u′, ∇ξ⟩dρ′ =
Z
Td⟨z, ∇ξ⟩dρ′
for all ξ ∈H1(Td). Subtracting the first order conditions implies that for all ξ ∈H1(Td),
Z
Td⟨u, ∇ξ⟩dρ =
Z
Td⟨u′, ∇ξ⟩dρ′ +
Z
Td⟨z, ∇ξ⟩dρ −
Z
Td⟨z, ∇ξ⟩dρ′.
Subtracting ⟨u′, ∇ξ⟩L2(ρ) from both sides yields
Z
Td⟨w, ∇ξ⟩dρ =
Z
Td⟨u′, ∇ξ⟩dρ′ +
Z
Td⟨z, ∇ξ⟩dρ −
Z
Td⟨z, ∇ξ⟩dρ′ −
Z
Td⟨u′, ∇ξ⟩dρ
=
Z
Td(z −u′)(ρ −ρ′) · ∇ξ.
Now we’ll test with ξ = ψ −ψ′ ≜δ. Since ∇δ = u −u′ = w,
Z
Td ∥w∥2
2 dρ =
Z
Td(ρ −ρ′)(z −u′) · w dx.
Under the assumption that ρ(x) ≥λ, through application of H¨older’s inequality we obtain
λ∥w∥2
L2(Td) ≤
Z
Td(ρ −ρ′)(z −u′) · w dx ≤∥ρ −ρ′∥L∞(Td)∥z −u′∥L2(Td)∥w∥L2(Td)
which implies the bound
∥w∥L2(Td) ≤1
λ∥ρ −ρ′∥L∞(Td)∥z −u′∥L2(Td).
Since u′ = Πρ′z is an orthogonal projection in L2(ρ′), ∥u′∥L2(ρ′) ≤∥z∥L2(ρ′). Thus
∥u′∥L2(Td) ≤λ−1/2∥u′∥L2(ρ′) ≤λ−1/2∥z∥L2(ρ′) =
Λ
λ
1/2
∥z∥L2(Td).
39
Thus, we recover the stability bound
∥Πρz −Πρ′z∥L2(Td) ≤1 +
p
Λ/λ
λ
∥ρ −ρ′∥L∞(Td) ∥z∥L2(Td).
Lemma A.6 (Lipschitz stability of weighted Helmholtz projection in H1). Assume that
ρ, ρ′ ∈W 1,∞(Td),
0 < λ ≤ρ, ρ′ ≤Λ.
Assume also that the densities are uniformly bounded in a Sobolev sense,
∥ρ∥W 1,∞(Td) + ∥ρ′∥W 1,∞(Td) ≤K.
Then there exists CΠ,1 > 0 depending only on the regularity constants such that for every z ∈
H1(Td; Rd),
∥Πρz −Πρ′z∥H1(Td) ≤CΠ,1 ∥ρ −ρ′∥W 1,∞(Td) ∥z∥H1(Td).
Proof. As derived in Lemma A.5, the first order optimality conditions of the projections give rise
to the equation
∇· (ρw) = ∇· ((ρ −ρ′)(z −u′))
(16)
where w = u −u′, u = Πρz and u′ = Πρ′z. If we identify u = ∇ψ and u′ = ∇ψ′ (as guaranteed by
Theorem A.2), then we can define δ ≜ψ −ψ′. By the arguments in Lemma A.5, one can show
∥w∥L2(Td) ≤C∥ρ −ρ′∥L∞(Td)∥z −u′∥L2(Td)
and ultimately one can bound the right hand side by C∥ρ −ρ′∥L∞(Td)∥z∥L2(Td). To obtain the
desired Sobolev stability bound, we can differentiate w spatially and bound the operator norm
of its gradient. We can do this by differentiating the first order conditions in Equation (16) –
differentiating the left-hand side with respect to the k-th coordinate yields
∂k(∇· (ρ∇δ)) = ∇· (∂k(ρ∇δ))
since w = ∇δ. Applying the product rule yields
∇· (∂k(ρ∇δ)) = ∇· (∂kρ∇δ + ρ∇(∂kδ)).
Differentiating the right-hand side of Equation (16) using G = (ρ −ρ′)(z −u′) yields
∂k(∇· ((ρ −ρ′)(z −u′)) = ∇· (∂kG).
Combining, and rearranging slightly results in,
−∇· (ρ∇(∂kδ)) = ∇· (∂kρ∇δ) −∇· (∂kG)
and when we test with a test function ξ ∈H1(Td), we integrate the above against ξ. Ultimately,
we want to apply the test function ξ = ∂kδ, but to do so we first need to show ∂kδ ∈H1(Td) or,
equivalently, ψ, ψ′ ∈H2(Td). To see that ψ, ψ′ are in H2(Td), we can apply the product rule for
divergences to rewrite the first order conditions for ψ as
−ρ∆ψ −⟨∇ψ, ∇ρ⟩= −ρ∇· z −⟨z, ∇ρ⟩
40
which, after rearranging, yields
∆ψ = ∇· z + ρ−1⟨∇ρ, z −∇ψ⟩.
Note that ∇·z ∈L2(Td) because z ∈H1(Td), and ρ−1⟨∇ρ, z−∇ψ⟩∈L2(Td) because ρ ∈W 1,∞(Td),
ρ ≥λ > 0 and both z, ∇ψ ∈L2(Td). Thus, we can conclude that ∆ψ ∈L2(Td) as well. By Theorem
15.1 of Dyatlov (2022), ∆ψ ∈L2(Td) implies that ψ ∈H2(Td). One can apply the same argument
to conclude that ψ′ ∈H2(Td) as well. Having established this, we can now take ξ = ∂kδ ∈L2(Td)
as our test function, yielding
Z
Td ∥∇(∂kδ)∥2
2 dρ =
Z
Td⟨∇(∂kδ), ∇δ⟩∂kρ dx −
Z
Td⟨∇(∂kδ), ∂kG⟩dx.
Applying H¨older’s inequality and using the fact that ρ ≥λ yields the bound
λ∥∇(∂kδ)∥2
L2(Td) ≤∥(∂kρ)∇δ∥L2(Td)∥∇(∂kδ)∥L2(Td) + ∥∇(∂kδ)∥L2(Td)∥∂kG∥L2(Td).
Thus,
∥∇(∂kδ)∥L2(Td) ≤1
λ

∥(∂kρ)∇δ∥L2(Td) + ∥∂kG∥L2(Td)

and if we sum over k and bound further we obtain
∥D2δ∥L2(Td) ≲∥∇ρ∥L∞(Td)∥∇δ∥L2(Td) + ∥G∥H1(Td)
where the left-hand side is the integrated Frobenius norm of the Hessian of x 7→δ(x). Since w = ∇δ,
∥w∥H1(Td) ≲∥∇δ∥L2(Td) + ∥D2δ∥L2(Td), which implies
∥w∥H1(Td) ≤C

(1 + ∥∇ρ∥L∞(Td))∥∇δ∥L2(Td) + ∥G∥H1(Td)

.
(17)
From Lemma A.5, we know that ∥∇δ∥L2(Td) = ∥w∥L2(Td) ≲∥ρ −ρ′∥L∞(Td)∥z −u′∥L2(Td), and
∥G∥H1(Td) ≤C∥ρ −ρ′∥W 1,∞(Td)∥z −u′∥H1(Td) ≤C∥ρ −ρ′∥W 1,∞(Td)(∥z∥H1(Td) + ∥u′∥H1(Td)). Thus,
we require a bound of the form ∥u′∥H1(Td) ≲∥z∥H1(Td). We can obtain this bound by differentiating
the first order conditions of the projection of z,
∇· (ρ′∇ψ′) = ∇· (ρ′z)
yielding
∇· (∂kρ′∇ψ′ + ρ′∂k∇ψ′) = ∇· (∂kρ′z + ρ′∂kz).
Applying the test function ∂kψ′ and moving around terms yields
Z
Td ∥∇(∂kψ′)∥2
2 dρ′ = −
Z
Td ∂kρ′⟨∇(∂kψ′), ∇ψ′⟩dx +
Z
Td(∂kρ′)⟨∇(∂kψ′), z⟩dx
+
Z d
T
⟨∇(∂kψ′), ∂kz⟩dρ′
≤∥∂kρ′∥L∞(Td)∥∇(∂kψ′)∥L2(Td)∥∇ψ′∥L2(Td)
+ ∥∂kρ′∥L∞(Td)∥∇(∂kψ′)∥L2(Td)∥z∥L2(Td)
+ Λ∥∇(∂kψ′)∥L2(Td)∥∂kz∥L2(Td).
41
where the second line used H¨older’s inequality and the bound ρ ≤Λ. Note that the left hand side
can be bounded from below by λ∥∇(∂kψ′)∥2
L2(Td). Thus, after cancellation we obtain
∥∇(∂kψ′)∥L2(Td) ≤1
λ

∥∂kρ′∥L∞(Td)∥∇ψ′∥L2(Td) + ∥∂kρ′∥L∞(Td)∥z∥L2(Td) + Λ∥∂kz∥L2(Td)

.
Summing over k, we get
∥∇u′∥L2(Td) ≲∥u′∥L2(Td) + ∥z∥H1(Td).
Now, using the fact that Πρ′ is an orthogonal projection implies that ∥u′∥L2(Td) ≲∥z∥L2(Td) ≤
∥z∥H1(Td) yielding
∥∇u′∥L2(Td) ≲∥z∥H1(Td).
Combining this with the L2 bound on u′ yields
∥u′∥H1(Td) ≲∥z∥H1(Td).
Plugging this bound back into Equation (17) yields
∥w∥H1(Td) ≤C

(1 + ∥∇ρ∥L∞(Td))∥w∥L2(Td) + C∥ρ −ρ′∥W 1,∞(Td)∥z∥H1(Td)

and using ∥w∥L2(Td) ≲∥ρ −ρ′∥W 1,∞(Td)∥z∥H1(Td) (Lemma A.5) gives the final bound
∥Πρz −Πρ′z∥H1(Td) ≤CΠ,1 ∥ρ −ρ′∥W 1,∞(Td) ∥z∥H1(Td).
for some CΠ,1 > 0 dependent only on regularity constants.
Lemma A.7 (Time regularity of the weighted Helmholtz projection). Let µt admit a Lebesgue
density ρt for t ∈[0, 1] such that:
1. there exist constants 0 < λ ≤Λ < ∞such that for all t ∈[0, 1],
λ ≤ρt(x) ≤Λ
for a.e. x ∈Td.
2. the map t 7→ρt is absolutely continuous as a map from [0, 1] into L∞(Td) and there exists
Kρ < ∞such that,
sup
t∈[0,1]
∥∂tρt∥L∞(Td) ≤Kρ.
Then there exists a constant C ˙Π > 0, depending only on λ, Λ, and Kρ, such that the following hold.
1. For every z ∈L2(Td; Rd) and all s, t ∈[0, 1],
∥Πµtz −Πµsz∥L2(Td) ≤C ˙Π|t −s| ∥z∥L2(Td).
In particular,
∥Πµt −Πµs∥L(L2(Td;Rd)) ≤C ˙Π|t −s|
where the norm is the operator norm on bounded linear maps L2(Td; Rd) →L2(Td; Rd).
2. For every absolutely continuous curve z· ∈AC([0, 1]; L2(Td; Rd)), the curve t 7→Πµtzt belongs
to AC([0, 1]; L2(Td; Rd)). Moreover, for a.e. t ∈[0, 1], define
(∂tΠt)zt ≜∂t(Πµtzt) −Πµt(∂tzt).
Then
∥(∂tΠt)zt∥L2(Td) ≤C ˙Π∥zt∥L2(Td)
for a.e. t ∈[0, 1].
42
By norm equivalence under the density bounds, the same conclusions hold in L2(ν) up to multi-
plicative constants depending only on λ, Λ.
Proof. We will start with the Lipschitz bound on the map t 7→Πµtz. Fix z ∈L2(Td; Rd) and define
ut ≜Πµtz. By first order optimality conditions, ut = ∇ψt and ψt satisfy
∇· (ρtut) = ∇· (ρtz).
Equivalently, for every φ ∈H1(Td),
Z
Td ρt⟨ut, ∇φ⟩dx =
Z
Td ρt⟨z, ∇φ⟩dx.
We first demonstrate the standard L2 bound on the projection. Since ut is the L2(µt)-orthogonal
projection of z onto the closed subspace TµtP2(Td), we have
∥ut∥L2(µt) ≤∥z∥L2(µt).
Using the density bounds,
λ∥ut∥2
L2(Td) ≤∥ut∥2
L2(µt) ≤∥z∥2
L2(µt) ≤Λ∥z∥2
L2(Td),
hence
∥ut∥L2(Td) ≤
r
Λ
λ ∥z∥L2(Td).
We now prove that the map t 7→Πµtz is Lipschitz in L2(Td; Rd). Let h > 0 be such that [t, t + h] ⊆
[0, 1]. Applying the first order conditions at times t and t + h and subtracting gives,
Z
Td ρt+h ⟨ut+h −ut, ∇φ⟩dx =
Z
Td(ρt+h −ρt)⟨z −ut, ∇φ⟩dx
for all φ ∈H1(Td). Since us = ∇ψs for each s, define
ηh := ψt+h −ψt
h
∈H1(Td),
∇ηh = ut+h −ut
h
.
Taking φ = ηh in the preceding identity and dividing by h yields
Z
Td ρt+h

ut+h −ut
h

2
2
dx =
Z
Td
ρt+h −ρt
h

z −ut, ut+h −ut
h

dx.
Using the lower density bound and applying H¨older’s inequality,
λ

ut+h −ut
h

2
L2(Td)
≤

ρt+h −ρt
h

L∞(Td)
∥z −ut∥L2(Td)

ut+h −ut
h

L2(Td)
.
Therefore,

ut+h −ut
h

L2(Td)
≤1
λ

ρt+h −ρt
h

L∞(Td)
∥z −ut∥L2(Td).
Since supt∈[0,1] ∥∂tρt∥L∞(Td) ≤Kρ and t 7→ρt is absolutely continuous as an L∞(Td) valued map,
we have
∥ρt+h −ρt∥L∞(Td) ≤Kρh
43
and thus,

ut+h −ut
h

L2(Td)
≤Kρ
λ ∥z −ut∥L2(Td).
Applying Minkowski’s inequality and the bound on ∥ut∥L2(Td) yields
∥z −ut∥L2(Td) ≤∥z∥L2(Td) + ∥ut∥L2(Td) ≤
 
1 +
r
Λ
λ
!
∥z∥L2(Td).
Combining and multiplying through by h therefore results in
∥ut+h −ut∥L2(Td) ≤Kρ
λ
 
1 +
r
Λ
λ
!
|h| ∥z∥L2(Td).
Thus, statement (1) holds with
C ˙Π = Kρ
λ
 
1 +
r
Λ
λ
!
.
Therefore the map t 7→Πµtz is Lipschitz as a map from [0, 1] to L2(Td; Rd). Taking the supremum
over all z such that ∥z∥L2(Td) = 1 yields the operator norm bound
∥Πµt −Πµs∥L(L2(Td)) ≤C ˙Π|t −s|.
Now let z(·) ∈AC([0, 1]; L2(Td; Rd)) and define yt ≜Πµt(zt). Since z(·) is absolutely continuous,
zt −zs =
R t
s ∂rzr dr. Note that
yt −ys = (Πµt −Πµs)(zs) + Πµt(zt −zs)
implies the bound
∥yt −ys∥L2(Td) ≤C ˙Π|t −s| ∥zs∥L2(Td) + ∥Πµt∥L(L2(Td))
Z t
s
∥∂rzr∥L2(Td) dr.
Since
∥Πµt∥L(L2(Td;Rd)) ≤
r
Λ
λ
and z(·) is continuous on [0, 1], the right-hand side is controlled by an L1 function of r. Therefore
y(·) ∈AC([0, 1]; L2(Td; Rd)). Next define
wt ≜yt −
Z t
0
Πµr(∂rzr) dr.
Since both y(·) and the integral term are absolutely continuous, w(·) is absolutely continuous as
well. Moreover, for 0 ≤s < t ≤1,
wt −ws = Πµtzt −Πµszs −
Z t
s
Πµr(∂rzr) dr
= (Πµt −Πµs)zs + Πµt
Z t
s
∂rzr dr

−
Z t
s
Πµr(∂rzr) dr
= (Πµt −Πµs)zs +
Z t
s
(Πµt −Πµr)(∂rzr) dr.
44
Therefore,
∥wt −ws∥L2(Td) ≤C ˙Π|t −s| ∥zs∥L2(Td) + C ˙Π
Z t
s
|t −r| ∥∂rzr∥L2(Td) dr.
Since w(·) is absolutely continuous, it is differentiable for a.e. t. For such t, define
(∂tΠt)zt ≜∂twt = ∂t(Πµtzt) −Πµt(∂tzt).
It remains to prove the bound on this defect term. Let t be a point at which w(·) is differentiable.
For h such that [t, t + h] ⊂[0, 1], the identity above gives
wt+h −wt = (Πµt+h −Πµt)zt +
Z t+h
t
(Πµt+h −Πµr)(∂rzr) dr.
Dividing by h and taking norms,

wt+h −wt
h

L2(Td)
≤C ˙Π∥zt∥L2(Td) + C ˙Π
1
|h|
Z t+h
t
|t + h −r| ∥∂rzr∥L2(Td) dr.
Since |t + h −r| ≤|h| on the interval of integration,
1
|h|
Z t+h
t
|t + h −r| ∥∂rzr∥L2(Td) dr ≤
Z t+h
t
∥∂rzr∥L2(Td) dr →0
as h →0. Hence
∥∂twt∥L2(Td) ≤C ˙Π∥zt∥L2(Td)
for a.e. t, i.e.
∥(∂tΠt)zt∥L2(Td) ≤C ˙Π∥zt∥L2(Td).
This proves item (2). The final statement in L2(ν) follows from the uniform equivalence between
L2(Td) and L2(ν) under the density bounds.
Proposition A.8 (H1 propagation of parallel fields). Let (µt)t∈[0,1] be a regular geodesic in P2(Td)
with tangent velocity field ∇ϕt, and suppose that each µt admits a Lebesgue density ρt. Let wt =
PTν→µt(v) be the parallel transport of v ∈TνP2(Td) ∩H1(Td; Rd) along the geodesic. Suppose that
there exist constants 0 < λ ≤Λ < ∞such that λ ≤ρt(x) ≤Λ for a.e. x ∈Td and all t ∈[0, 1], it
holds that
sup
t∈[0,1]
∥∇ϕt∥W 1,∞(Td) ≤M,
and it holds that
sup
t∈[0,1]
∥∇log ρt∥L∞(Td) ≤Klog.
Then there exists Cpar > 0 depending only on λ, Λ, M, Klog such that
∥wt∥H1(Td) ≤Cpar ∥v∥H1(Td)
∀t ∈[0, 1].
Moreover, w ∈L∞(0, 1; H1(Td; Rd)) ∩W 1,∞(0, 1; L2(Td; Rd)), with
∥w∥L∞(0,1;H1(Td)) + ∥∂tw∥L∞(0,1;L2(Td)) ≤C∥v∥H1(Td).
45
Proof. Our proof technique will be as follows: we will construct a Galerkin approximation (Evans
(2022, §7.1.2)) to the parallel field wt, which approximates the wt by an orthogonal projection onto
a finite-dimensional subspace. In particular, let {ek}k≥1 denote a smooth mean-zero orthonormal
basis of the eigenfunctions of the Laplacian on Td,
−∆ek = λkek,
Z
Td ek dx = 0.
Define the finite dimensional subspaces
Vm ≜span{∇e1, . . . , ∇em} ⊂C∞(Td; Rd).
By Theorem A.2, we know that v ∈TνP2(Td) ∩H1(Td; Rd) is necessarily a gradient field of a
potential ψ ∈H1(Td). The fact that v ∈H1(Td; Rd) implies that ∇·v = ∆ψ ∈L2(Td). By Theorem
15.1 of Dyatlov (2022), ∆ψ ∈L2(Td) implies that ψ ∈H2(Td).
Now define the approximate
potential and gradient field
ψm ≜
m
X
k=1
⟨ψ, ek⟩L2(Td) · ek,
vm ≜∇ψm.
Then vm ∈Vm, and
ψ −ψm =
X
k>m
⟨ψ, ek⟩L2(Td) · ek
=⇒
∥ψ −ψm∥2
H2(Td) ≍
X
k>m
(1 + λk)2|⟨ψ, ek⟩|2 m→∞
−→0
by the Fourier characterization of Sobolev spaces on Td (Shkoller (2009), Definition 5.6). Thus,
∥v −vm∥H1(Td) = ∥∇ψ −∇ψm∥H1(Td) ≤∥ψ −ψm∥H2(Td) →0.
For each m, we construct wm : [0, 1] →Vm by requiring
Z
Td ρt(x)

∂twm(t, x) + ∇wm(t, x) ∇ϕt(x), ξ(x)

dx = 0
∀ξ ∈Vm
(18)
for a.e. t ∈[0, 1], together with the requirement wm(0) = vm. Now choose a basis {ξ1, . . . , ξNm} of
Vm and write
wm(t) =
Nm
X
ℓ=1
a(m)
ℓ
(t) ξℓ.
Then Equation (18) is equivalent to the linear ODE system
Mm(t) a′
m(t) + Bm(t) am(t) = 0,
where
(Mm(t))ij =
Z
Td ρt⟨ξj, ξi⟩dx,
(Bm(t))ij =
Z
Td ρt⟨∇ξj ∇ϕt, ξi⟩dx.
Because λ ≤ρt ≤Λ, the matrix Mm(t) is uniformly positive definite,
a⊤Mm(t)a =
Z
Td ρt

Nm
X
j=1
ajξj

2
2dx ≥λ

Nm
X
j=1
ajξj

2
L2(Td).
46
Moreover, Mm and Bm are bounded measurable in t. Hence, by Carath´eodory’s existence theorem,
there exists a unique
am ∈AC([0, 1]; RNm),
and therefore
wm ∈AC([0, 1]; Vm) ⊂AC([0, 1]; L2(Td; Rd)).
Since wm(t) ∈Vm, we may choose ξ = wm(t) in Equation (18). This gives
Z
Td ρt⟨∂twm, wm⟩dx +
Z
Td ρt⟨∇wm ∇ϕt, wm⟩dx = 0.
Because (ρt, ∇ϕt) solves the continuity equation on Td,
∂tρt + ∇· (ρt∇ϕt) = 0
in the distributional sense, and because Td has no boundary, we obtain
1
2
d
dt
Z
Td ρt∥wm∥2
2 dx =
Z
Td ρt⟨∂twm, wm⟩dx + 1
2
Z
Td(∂tρt)∥wm∥2
2 dx
= −
Z
Td ρt⟨∇wm ∇ϕt, wm⟩dx + 1
2
Z
Td(∂tρt)∥wm∥2
2 dx
= −1
2
Z
Td ρt∇ϕt · ∇(∥wm∥2
2) dx + 1
2
Z
Td(∂tρt)∥wm∥2
2 dx
= 1
2
Z
Td ∇· (ρt∇ϕt) ∥wm∥2
2 dx + 1
2
Z
Td(∂tρt)∥wm∥2
2 dx
= 0.
Thus, ∥wm(t)∥L2(µt) = ∥vm∥L2(ν) for all t ∈[0, 1]. Now let Pm,t : L2(µt; Rd) →Vm denote the L2(µt)
orthogonal projection onto Vm. Since Equation (18) stipulates precisely that
∂twm + Pm,t
 ∇wm ∇ϕt

= 0
in Vm,
we have ∂twm = −Pm,t
 ∇wm ∇ϕt

. By contractivity of orthogonal projection in L2(µt),
∥∂twm∥L2(µt) ≤∥∇wm ∇ϕt∥L2(µt) ≤∥∇ϕt∥L∞∥∇wm∥L2(µt) ≤M∥∇wm∥L2(µt).
Thus
∥∂twm∥L2(Td) ≤M
r
Λ
λ ∥∇wm∥L2(Td).
(19)
Define the weighted gradient energy
Em(t) ≜
Z
Td ρt(x) ∥∇wm(t, x)∥2
F dx.
The density bounds imply
λ∥∇wm(t)∥2
L2(Td;F) ≤Em(t) ≤Λ∥∇wm(t)∥2
L2(Td;F).
(20)
Since wm = ∇ψm ∈Vm, we have −∆wm = ∇(−∆ψm) ∈Vm. Thus we may choose ξ = −∆wm(t)
in Equation (18). Writing 0 = I1(t) + I2(t), where
I1(t) ≜
Z
Td ρt⟨∂twm, −∆wm⟩dx,
and
I2(t) ≜
Z
Td ρt⟨∇wm ∇ϕt, −∆wm⟩dx,
47
we bound the two terms separately. For I1, we can integrate by parts on Td, yielding
I1(t) =
d
X
j=1
Z
Td ρt⟨∂j∂twm, ∂jwm⟩dx +
d
X
j=1
Z
Td(∂jρt) ⟨∂twm, ∂jwm⟩dx
= 1
2
d
dtEm(t) −1
2
Z
Td(∂tρt) ∥∇wm∥2
F dx + R1,m(t),
where
R1,m(t) ≜
d
X
j=1
Z
Td(∂jρt) ⟨∂twm, ∂jwm⟩dx.
Using ∇ρt = ρt∇log ρt, the bound on ∇log ρt, and Equation (19), we obtain
|R1,m(t)| ≤∥∇log ρt∥L∞∥∂twm∥L2(µt)∥∇wm∥L2(µt)
≤Klog M Em(t).
For I2, integrate by parts again:
I2(t) =
d
X
j=1
Z
Td ρt

∂j(∇wm ∇ϕt), ∂jwm

dx +
d
X
j=1
Z
Td(∂jρt)

∇wm ∇ϕt, ∂jwm

dx
≜I21(t) + I22(t).
The second term satisfies
| I22(t)| ≤∥∇log ρt∥L∞∥∇ϕt∥L∞Em(t) ≤KlogMEm(t).
Expanding yields
∂j(∇wm ∇ϕt) = (∂j∇wm) ∇ϕt + ∇wm (∂j∇ϕt).
Hence I21(t) = I211(t) + I212(t) where
I211(t) ≜
d
X
j=1
Z
Td ρt

(∂j∇wm) ∇ϕt, ∂jwm

dx,
I212(t) ≜
d
X
j=1
Z
Td ρt

∇wm (∂j∇ϕt), ∂jwm

dx.
To bound I212(t) we simply use ∥∇2ϕt∥L∞≤M, yielding |I212(t)| ≤MEm(t). For I211, observe that
d
X
j=1

(∂j∇wm) ∇ϕt, ∂jwm

= 1
2∇ϕt · ∇
 ∥∇wm∥2
F

.
Therefore
I211(t) = 1
2
Z
Td ρt ∇ϕt · ∇
 ∥∇wm∥2
F

dx
= −1
2
Z
Td ∇· (ρt∇ϕt) ∥∇wm∥2
F dx
= 1
2
Z
Td(∂tρt) ∥∇wm∥2
F dx,
48
again by the continuity equation. Combining the preceding bounds gives
I2(t) = 1
2
Z
Td(∂tρt) ∥∇wm∥2
F dx + R2,m(t),
where
|R2,m(t)| ≤M(1 + Klog)Em(t).
Since I1(t) + I2(t) = 0, the ∂tρt terms cancel, and we conclude that
1
2
d
dtEm(t) ≤
 M + 2MKlog

Em(t)
for a.e. t ∈[0, 1].
Applying Gr¨onwall’s inequality (Lemma B.2) yields,
Em(t) ≤e2(M+2MKlog)t · Em(0)
∀t ∈[0, 1].
Using Equation (20) at t = 0 and the convergence vm →v in H1,
Em(0) =
Z
Td ρ0∥∇vm|2
F dx ≤Λ∥vm∥2
H1(Td) ≤C∥v∥2
H1(Td)
for all sufficiently large m. Hence
sup
m≥1
sup
t∈[0,1]
∥wm(t)∥H1(Td) ≤C∥v∥H1(Td)
for a constant C depending only on λ, Λ, M, Klog. Combining this with Equation (19) yields
sup
m≥1
∥∂twm∥L∞(0,1;L2(Td)) ≤C∥v∥H1(Td).
The uniform bounds obtained above imply
sup
m ∥wm∥L∞(0,1;H1(Td)) + sup
m ∥∂twm∥L∞(0,1;L2(Td)) < ∞.
For each fixed t ∈[0, 1], the sequence {wm(t)}m is bounded in H1(Td; Rd) by the uniform bound
on wm. Since the embedding
H1(Td; Rd) ,→L2(Td; Rd)
is compact by the Rellich–Kondrachov theorem (Evans (2022, §5.7)), it follows that for each fixed
t ∈[0, 1], the set {wm(t)}m is relatively compact in L2(Td; Rd). Moreover, for all s, t ∈[0, 1],
∥wm(t) −wm(s)∥L2(Td) ≤
Z t
s
∥∂rwm(r)∥L2(Td) dr ≤C|t −s|,
where C is independent of m. Thus {wm}m is equicontinuous as a family of maps from [0, 1] into
L2(Td; Rd), and for each fixed t its image is relatively compact in L2(Td; Rd). By the Arzel`a–Ascoli
theorem, after passing to a subsequence we obtain
wm →w
strongly in C([0, 1]; L2(Td; Rd)).
In particular, since wm(0) = vm and vm →v in L2(Td; Rd), we obtain w(0) = v. On the other
hand, the uniform L∞(0, 1; H1(Td)) bound on wm allows us to apply the Banach-Alaoglu theorem
(Rudin, 1991, Theorem 3.15) to extract a further subsequence along which
wm
∗⇀w
in L∞(0, 1; H1(Td; Rd))
49
where
∗⇀denotes convergence in the weak-* topology. It therefore follows that
∇wm
∗⇀∇w
in L∞(0, 1; L2(Td; Rd))
along the same subsequence. By the uniform bound
sup
m ∥∂twm∥L∞(0,1;L2(Td)) < ∞,
the Banach–Alaoglu theorem (Rudin, 1991, Theorem 3.15) yields, after passing to a further subse-
quence (not relabeled), the existence of
g ∈L∞(0, 1; L2(Td; Rd))
such that
∂twm
∗⇀g
in L∞(0, 1; L2(Td; Rd)).
For every ψ ∈L2(Td; Rd) and every ζ ∈C∞
c (0, 1), since wm ∈W 1,∞(0, 1; L2(Td; Rd)), we have
Z 1
0
⟨∂twm(t), ψ⟩L2 ζ(t) dt = −
Z 1
0
⟨wm(t), ψ⟩L2 ζ′(t) dt.
Passing to the limit as m →∞, using the weak-* convergence of ∂twm and the strong convergence
wm →w in C([0, 1]; L2(Td; Rd)), yields
Z 1
0
⟨g(t), ψ⟩L2 ζ(t) dt = −
Z 1
0
⟨w(t), ψ⟩L2 ζ′(t) dt.
Thus g is the weak time derivative of w, i.e. ∂tw = g. In particular,
w ∈W 1,∞(0, 1; L2(Td; Rd)).
Moreover, since g is a weak-* limit of a sequence bounded by C∥v∥H1(Td) in L∞
t L2
x, we have
∥∂tw∥L∞(0,1;L2(Td)) ≤C∥v∥H1(Td).
Let η be any mean-zero trigonometric polynomial and set ξ = ∇η, and let ζ ∈C∞
c (0, 1). For all m
large enough, ξ ∈Vm, so Equation (18) gives
Z 1
0
Z
Td ρt

∂twm + ∇wm ∇ϕt, ξ

ζ(t) dx dt = 0
∀ζ ∈C∞
c (0, 1).
Integrating the first term by parts in time yields
0 = −
Z 1
0
Z
Td ρt⟨wm, ξ⟩ζ′(t) dx dt −
Z 1
0
Z
Td(∂tρt)⟨wm, ξ⟩ζ(t) dx dt
+
Z 1
0
Z
Td ρt⟨∇wm ∇ϕt, ξ⟩ζ(t) dx dt.
Passing to the limit, using the strong convergence of wm in C([0, 1]; L2) for the first two terms and
the weak-∗convergence of ∇wm in L∞
t L2
x for the last term, we obtain
0 = −
Z 1
0
Z
Td ρt⟨w, ξ⟩ζ′(t) dx dt −
Z 1
0
Z
Td(∂tρt)⟨w, ξ⟩ζ(t) dx dt
+
Z 1
0
Z
Td ρt⟨∇w ∇ϕt, ξ⟩ζ(t) dx dt.
50
Since w ∈W 1,∞(0, 1; L2(Td; Rd)), we may apply the Banach-valued integration-by-parts formula
with the test function
Ψ(t) ≜ρt · ξ · ζ(t) ∈W 1,1(0, 1; L2(Td; Rd)).
This gives
Z 1
0
Z
Td ρt⟨∂tw, ξ⟩ζ(t) dx dt = −
Z 1
0
Z
Td ρt⟨w, ξ⟩ζ′(t) dx dt −
Z 1
0
Z
Td(∂tρt)⟨w, ξ⟩ζ(t) dx dt.
Therefore the preceding identity is equivalent to
Z 1
0
Z
Td ρt

∂tw + ∇w ∇ϕt, ξ

ζ(t) dx dt = 0
∀ζ ∈C∞
c (0, 1).
For η ∈C∞(Td), let SNη be its Fourier partial sums. Then SNη is a trigonometric polynomial for
each N, and SNη →η in C1(Td), since the Fourier series of η and of each ∂jη converge uniformly
(Casselman, 2016, Proposition 1.6). Hence
∇SNη →∇η
uniformly on Td,
so trigonometric gradients are dense in the space of smooth periodic gradient fields. It then follows
that
Πµt
 ∂twt + ∇wt ∇ϕt

= 0
in the distributional sense on (0, 1).
Moreover, because each wm(t) ∈Vm ⊂TµtP2(Td) and
TµtP2(Td) is closed in L2(µt), the strong L2 convergence implies
wt ∈TµtP2(Td)
∀t ∈[0, 1].
Thus w is a parallel field along (µt) with initial value v. By uniqueness of parallel transport along
regular geodesics (Ambrosio and Gigli, 2012, page 104), we must have
wt = PTν→µt(v)
∀t ∈[0, 1].
Finally, the uniform H1 bound passes to the limit by weak lower semicontinuity. In particular, for
a.e. t ∈[0, 1],
∥wt∥H1(Td) ≤lim inf
m→∞∥wm(t)∥H1(Td) ≤C∥v∥H1(Td).
Since w ∈C([0, 1]; L2), this bound extends from a full-measure subset of times to all t ∈[0, 1] by
taking sequences tn →t from that full-measure set and using weak compactness in H1 together
with strong convergence in L2. Therefore
∥wt∥H1(Td) ≤Cpar∥v∥H1(Td)
∀t ∈[0, 1],
as claimed.
Corollary A.9. Under the hypotheses of Proposition A.8, the parallel transport field
wt = PTν→µt(v)
belongs to
W 1,∞(0, 1; L2(Td; Rd)) ⊂AC([0, 1]; L2(Td; Rd)).
Under the uniform density bounds, the same conclusion holds with L2(ν; Rd) in place of L2(Td; Rd).
The same statement holds for any second regular geodesic (µ′
t) satisfying the same hypotheses.
51
Proof. The proof of Proposition A.8 shows, in addition to the pointwise H1 bound, that the limit
parallel transport field satisfies w ∈W 1,∞(0, 1; L2(Td; Rd)). Thus, w ∈AC([0, 1]; L2(Td; Rd)). Un-
der the uniform density bounds, the norms of L2(Td; Rd) and L2(ν; Rd) are uniformly equivalent,
so the same conclusion holds with L2(ν; Rd) in place of L2(Td; Rd). The same argument applies
verbatim to any second regular geodesic (µ′
t) satisfying the same hypotheses.
Theorem A.10 (Lax-Milgram Theorem, Evans (2022, § 6.2.1)). Let H be a real Hilbert space with
inner product ⟨·, ·⟩H and norm ∥·∥H. Assume that B : H ×H →R is a bilinear mapping for which
there exist constants α, β > 0 such that
|B(u, v)| ≤α∥u∥H∥v∥H
∀u, v ∈H
and
β∥u∥2
H ≤B(u, u)
∀u ∈H.
Finally, let f : H →R be a bounded linear functional on H. Then there exists a unique element
u ∈H such that
B(u, v) = ⟨f, v⟩H
for all v ∈H.
B
Proofs of Results From the Text
B.1
Proof of Theorem 3.3
In this derivation we will abuse notation and denote µt as both the density and the probability
measure associated with the Gaussian of interest – since Gaussians admit a density, there should
be no confusion. Given two Gaussian probability measures
µ0 = N(m0, Σ0),
µ1 = N(m1, Σ1)
with Σ0, Σ1 ∈Sd
+, the optimal transport map and tangent vector are
T(x) = m1 −Bm0 + Bx,
v(x) = m1 −Bm0 + (B −Id)x
and B is the Brenier matrix given by
B = Σ−1/2
0

Σ1/2
0
Σ1Σ1/2
0
1/2
Σ−1/2
0
as derived in Takatsu (2011). We can obtain the interpolating geodesic by pushing µ0 forward
through the map
Ft(x) = mt + Mt(x −m0)
where mt = (1−t)m0 +tm1 and Mt = (1−t)Id +tB, which implies that the interpolating measures
are given by
µt = (Ft)#µ0 = N(mt, MtΣ0M⊤
t ).
Now we want to obtain the Eulerian velocity ∇φt of the geodesic. Since M = Rd we have
∇φt(y) = ((T −Id) ◦F −1
t
)(y) = m1 −Bm0 + (B −Id)(F −1
t
(y))
= (m1 −m0) + (B −Id) M−1
t
(y −mt) .
52
Now consider an affine tangent vector of the form vt(x) = at + At(x −mt) ∈TµtP2(Rd), At ∈Sd
along the geodesic µt. Note that we restrict our search for a parallel field to affine maps as they
preserve Gaussianity – furthermore, we require At to be symmetric to ensure that vt is truly a
gradient field. For vt to be the parallel transport along the geodesic (Ft)#µ0, it needs to be the
a.e. solution to the PDE
∇· (µt (∂tvt + ∇vt · ∇φt)) = 0.
We have ∂tvt = ˙at + ˙At(x −mt) −At(m1 −m0) and ∇vt = At, which taken together yield the
condition
∇· (µtwt) = 0,
wt ≜˙at +

˙At + At(B −Id)M−1
t

(x −mt).
Applying the product rule for divergence,
∇· (µtwt) = µt(∇· wt) + ⟨wt, ∇µt⟩= µt (∇· wt + ⟨wt, ∇log µt⟩) .
For the first term,
∇· wt = tr(∇wt) = tr

˙At + At(B −Id)M−1
t

≜tr (Ct) .
For the second term, we have ∇log µt = −M−⊤
t
Σ−1
0 M−1
t
(x −mt) ≜−Qt(x −mt). Putting it
together, since µt > 0 we know that vt is a parallel field along µt if
tr(Ct) −˙a⊤
t Qt(x −mt) −(x −mt)C⊤
t Qt(x −mt) = 0
∀x ∈Rd.
Thus, we require that all coefficients of the second-order polynomial above be zero. Since Qt is
invertible, ˙at ≡0. A sufficient set of conditions on ˙At and At is described by
tr (Ct) = 0
and
C⊤
t Qt is skew-symmetric.
We will start with the second condition. Expanding, we have

˙At + At(B −Id)M−1
t
⊤
Qt + Q⊤
t

˙At + At(B −Id)M−1
t

= 0
=⇒
˙AtQt + Qt ˙At = S⊤
t AtQt + QtAtSt
with
St ≜(Id −B)M−1
t
.
(∗)
Note that ˙At can be recovered with well established tools, as (∗) is simply an instantiation of the
continuous Lyapunov equation. The trace condition tr(Ct) = 0 follows from skew symmetry, as
skew symmetry of C⊤
t Qt and the fact that Qt is positive semi-definite guarantees that Ct has zero
trace. Therefore,
vt(x) = a0 + At(x −mt)
with
At = A0 +
Z t
0
˙As ds
is the parallel transport of v0(x) along the curve µt.
B.2
Proof of Theorem 3.11
Firstly, Theorem 1 of Zhou (2008) proves the derivative-reproducing property ∂jf(x) = ⟨∂jK(x, ·), f⟩H
where the partial derivative is taken with respect to the j-th coordinate of the second argument.
Now consider the function class span{∂jK(xi, ·) : i ∈{1, . . . , n}, j ∈{1, . . . , d}}. Any function
53
f ∈H can therefore be decomposed as f = f∥+ f⊥where f∥is in the class and f⊥is in the
orthogonal complement – this implies that ∥f∥2
H = ∥f∥∥2
H + ∥f⊥∥2
H ≥∥f∥∥2
H, and
∂jf(x) = ⟨∂jK(x, ·), f⟩H
(reproducing property)
= ⟨∂jK(x, ·), f∥⟩H + ⟨∂jK(x, ·), f⊥⟩H
= ⟨∂jK(x, ·), f∥⟩H
= ∂jf∥(x)
(reproducing property)
for any x ∈{x1, . . . , xn} by definition of f⊥. Together, these imply that the optimization problem
in Equation (10) is minimized by choosing ˆfλ ∈span{∂jK(xi, ·) : i ∈{1, . . . , n}, j ∈{1, . . . , d}}.
This means it can be written as
ˆfλ(·) =
n
X
i=1
⟨ci, ∇2K(xi, ·)⟩
and
∇ˆfλ(xj) =
n
X
i=1
∇2
2K(xi, xj)ci
where the inner product is the standard Euclidean inner product on Rd and ∇i denotes the gradient
with respect to the i-th argument.
B.3
Proof of Proposition 3.13
Let
Fµ ≜{∇f : f ∈H}
and
Aµ ≜{∇f : f ∈C∞
c (Rd)}
We will first show that for any ∇f ∈Fµ there exists a sequence ∇fm ∈Aµ such that ∇fm →∇f
in the L2(µ) topology. This will imply the inclusion Fµ ⊆Aµ
L2(µ). By assumption, we know that
H = Hτ(Rd) as sets and they are norm equivalent. Since
Hτ(Rd) = C∞
c (Rd)
Hτ
by definition, we know that C∞
c (Rd) is dense in H with respect to the Sobolev norm Hτ. This
means that for every f ∈H there exists a sequence fm ∈C∞
c
such that
∥fm −f∥Hτ(Rd) →0.
Now we will show that this implies density with respect to the L2(µ) norm. The assumption that
τ ≥1 implies that ∥f∥2
Hτ(Rd) = P
|α|≤k ∥Dαf∥2
L2(Rd) ≥∥∇f∥2
L2(Rd), implying that the operator
∇: Hτ(Rd) →L2(Rd) is Lipschitz with constant 1. Thus, if fm →f in Hτ(Rd) then
∥∇fm −∇f∥L2(Rd) →0.
Since the Lebesgue density ρ of µ is bounded, convergence in L2(Rd) implies convergence in L2(µ).
In particular, ∥∇fm −∇f∥L2(µ) →0.
Thus, for any ∇f ∈Fµ there exists a sequence in Aµ
converging to it. This implies the inclusion
Fµ ⊆Aµ
L2(µ) =⇒Fµ
L2(µ) ⊆Aµ
L2(µ).
Now we will see that the reverse conclusion is trivial. By assumption H ∼= Hτ(Rd) and Hτ(Rd) =
C∞
c (Rd)
Hτ
, which implies that C∞
c (Rd) ⊆H. Taking the L2(µ) closure finishes the proof.
54
B.4
Proof of Lemma 3.8.
Let v ∈L2(ν) be a vector field on M and define the following function,
L2(νs) ∋τ s
0(v)(x) ≜
(
the parallel transport of v(F −1
s
(x)) on M along the curve
r 7→Fr(F −1
s
(x)) from r = 0 to r = s .
By the triangle inequality, we have
∥ws −τ s
0(v)∥L2(νs) ≤∥ws −Πνs(τ s
0(v))∥L2(νs) + ∥Πνs(τ s
0(v)) −PTν→νs(v)∥L2(νs).
By equations 4.18 and 4.10 of Gigli (2012), we have that the second term satisfies
∥Πνs(τ s
0(v)) −PTν→νs(v)∥L2(νs) ≤

e
R 1
0 Lip(∇ψr)dr −1
2
∥v∥L2(ν)
Z s
0
Lip(∇ψr)dr
2
where Lip(∇ψr) is the largest Lipschitz constant of the velocity field generating the geodesic
expν(su). Now we will handle the first term in the triangle inequality. Note that Πνs : L2(νs) →
TνsP2(M) is a projection onto a closed and linear subset, and it is therefore non-expansive. This
allows us to say
∥ws −Πνs(τ s
0(v))∥L2(νs) ≤
s−1jν,u (0, v) (s) −τ s
0(v)

L2(νs)
=
 Z
∥s−1jF −1
s
(x),u(F −1
s
(x))
 0, v(F −1
s
(x))

(s)
−PTM
F −1
s
(x)→x(v(F −1
s
(x)))∥2
g dνs(x)
1/2
=
Z
∥s−1jy,u(y) (0, v(y)) (s) −PTM
y→Fs(y)(v(y))∥2
g dν(y)
1/2
.
Now we’ll apply Proposition 3.5 to say
∥s−1jy,u(y) (0, v(y)) (s) −PTM
y→Fs(y)(v(y))∥g ≤As2∥v(y)∥g
for s sufficiently small, which implies
∥ws −Πνs(τ s
0(v))∥L2(νs) ≤
Z
A2s4∥v∥2
g dν
1/2
= As2∥v∥L2(ν).
The second part of the result follows from the fact that t 7→νt is assumed to be strongly regular
and thus admits a velocity field with a spatial Lipschitz constant that integrates to O(s) in the
bound of the second term.
B.5
Proof of Theorem 3.9.
By Lemma 3.8 we know that for each k ∈{1 . . . , N} we have
∥c
PTk(w) −PTk(w)∥L2(νks) ≤Cs2
for some C > 0 independent of k. Now let ek ≜ˆvk −vk. By the triangle inequality
∥ˆvk −vk∥L2(νsk) = ∥c
PTk(ˆvk−1) −PTk(vk−1)∥L2(νsk)
≤∥c
PTk(ˆvk−1) −PTk(ˆvk−1)∥L2(νsk) + ∥PTk(ˆvk−1) −PTk(vk−1)∥L2(νsk).
55
Note that the first term is bounded by Cs2∥ˆvk−1∥L2(ν(k−1)s) due to Lemma 3.8.
Since parallel
transport is an isometry, we have that the second term can be rewritten to
∥PTk(ˆvk−1) −PTk(vk−1)∥L2(νsk) = ∥ˆvk−1 −vk−1∥L2(νs(k−1)) = ∥ek−1∥L2(νs(k−1)).
Putting it together, we have the recurrence relation
∥ek∥L2(νsk) ≤Cs2∥ˆvk−1∥L2(ν(k−1)s) + ∥ek−1∥L2(νs(k−1)).
By triangle inequality and the isometry of parallel transport, we have
∥ˆvk−1∥L2(ν(k−1)s) ≤∥ˆvk−1 −vk−1∥L2(ν(k−1)s) + ∥vk−1∥L2(ν(k−1)s) = ∥ek−1∥L2(ν(k−1)s) + ∥v∥L2(ν).
This implies
∥ek∥L2(νsk) ≤Cs2∥v∥L2(ν) + ∥ek−1∥L2(νs(k−1))
 1 + Cs2
.
One can verify that the recurrence relation implies
∥ek∥L2(νsk) ≤Cs2∥v∥L2(ν)
k
X
i=0
(1 + Cs2)i
= Cs2∥v∥L2(ν)
(1 + Cs2)k −1
Cs2
= ∥v∥L2(ν)

(1 + Cs2)k −1

.
(21)
Since k ≤N = 1/s it holds that (1+Cs2)k ≤(1+Cs2)1/s = 1+Cs+O(s2), where the last equality
is shown in Lemma B.4. It follows that ∥ek∥L2(νsk) = O(s) for all k ≤N.
B.6
Proof of Proposition 3.7
Under the assumptions of the result statement, the optimal transport coupling between µ and ν is
supported on a map of the form ∇φ (Theorem 2.1). For quadratic OT (as we have), the potential
φ solves the Monge-Ampere equation
det(∇2φ(x)) = f(x)/g(∇φ(x))
s.t.
∇φ(Ω) = Ω∗.
By Theorem 1.1 of Trudinger (2013), ∇φ is a C2 diffeomorphism from Ωto Ω∗. It follows that
∇φ is bi-Lipschitz on Ωsince Ωis compact.
Now we will compute the Eulerian tangent field
generating the geodesic and show that it is spatially Lipschitz.
Define the interpolation map
Ft(x) ≜(1 −t)x + t∇φ(x), and observe that its gradient is given by ∇Ft = (1 −t)id + t∇2φ. Since
∇φ is a diffeomorphism between compact domains, ∇2φ must have eigenvalues bounded away from
zero
inf
x∈Ω
λmin(∇2φ) ≥m > 0
implying that
λmin(∇Ft) ≥1 −t + t · λmin(∇2φ) ≥min{1, m} > 0
(22)
implying that Ft is invertible. Moreover, since ∇φ is C2 on a compact domain, ∥∇2φ∥op must be
bounded on Ω,
sup
x∈Ω
∥∇2φ(x)∥op ≤M < ∞.
The Eulerian velocity field generating the geodesic is given by vt(y) = ((∇φ −id) ◦F −1
t
)(y), which
implies
∇vt(y) = ∇2φ(x) · (∇Ft(x))−1 −(∇Ft(x))−1 = (∇2φ(x) −Id) · (∇Ft(x))−1
x = F −1
t
(y).
56
Define Ωt = Ft(Ω) and observe that
sup
y∈Ωt
∥∇vt(y)∥2 ≤sup
x∈Ω
∥∇2φ(x) −Id∥op∥(∇Ft(x))−1∥op ≤
M + 1
min{1, m} < ∞.
Since the bound holds for all t, we know that Lip(vt) ≤(M + 1)/ min{1, m} for all t. Thus,
Z 1
0
Lip(vt) dt < ∞.
Now it remains to show that
R 1
0 ∥vt∥2
L2(µt)dt < ∞. We can bound this directly as follows,
Z 1
0
∥vt∥2
L2(µt)dt =
Z 1
0
Z
Ω
∥∇φ(x) −x∥2
2 dµ dt
(µt = (Ft)#µ)
≤
Z 1
0
sup
x∈Ω
∥∇φ(x) −x∥2
2 dt
< ∞
by compactness and continuity of ∇φ.
It follows that the geodesic induced by ∇φ is indeed
regular.
B.7
Proof of Lemma 4.3.
In this proof let exp denote the exponential map on Td. By the triangle inequality
W2(ˆµ∗
i+1, µ∗
i+1) = W2(exp(ˆv)#ˆµ∗
i , exp(∇φ∗
i )#µ∗
i )
≤W2(exp(ˆv)#ˆµ∗
i , exp(∇φ∗
i )#ˆµ∗
i ) + W2(exp(∇φ∗
i )#ˆµ∗
i , exp(∇φ∗
i )#µ∗
i ).
For the second term, recall that for any measurable map F that is L-Lipschitz we have W2(F#µ, F#ν) ≤
L · W2(µ, ν). To see this, let γ∗be the optimal coupling of µ and ν and observe that
W 2
2 (F#µ, F#ν) ≤
Z
M×M
d2(F(x), F(y)) dγ∗(x, y)
≤L2
Z
M×M
d2(x, y) dγ∗(x, y)
= L2 · W 2
2 (µ, ν).
Thus, we need to determine the Lipschitz constant of the map exp(∇φ∗
i ). By assumption, ∇φ∗
i is
spatially Lipschitz and the exponential map on Td is globally Lipschitz with a constant 1. Thus,
W2(exp(∇φ∗
i )#ˆµi, exp(∇φ∗
i )#µ∗
i ) ≤(1 + Lip(∇φ∗
i )) · W2(ˆµ∗
i , µ∗
i ).
For the first term in the original inequality, we can choose the suboptimal coupling
(expX(ˆv(X)), expX(∇φ∗
i (X)))
where X ∼ˆµ∗
i . Thus,
W 2
2 (exp(ˆv)#ˆµ∗
i , exp(∇φ∗
i )#ˆµ∗
i ) ≤
Z
M
d2
M
 expx(ˆv(x)), expx(∇φ∗
i (x))

dˆµ∗
i (x)
≤
Z
M
∥ˆv(x) −∇φ∗
i (x)∥2
2 dˆµ∗
i (x)
≤∥ˆv −∇φ∗
i ∥2
L2(ˆµ∗
i ).
57
Recall that ˆv = c
PTνi→ˆµ∗
i (∇φi), while ∇φ∗
i = PTνi→µ∗
i (∇φi). Thus, we will split up the discrepancy
between the two with Minkowski’s inequality
∥ˆv −∇φ∗
i ∥L2(ˆµ∗
i ) ≤∥ˆv −PTνi→ˆµ∗
i (∇φi)∥L2(ˆµ∗
i ) + ∥PTνi→ˆµ∗
i (∇φi) −PTνi→µ∗
i (∇φi)∥L2(ˆµ∗
i ).
Theorem 3.9 and the norm equivalence of L2(µ∗
i ; Rd) and L2(ˆµ∗
i ; Rd) imply that the first term is
O(N−1). The second term represents the stability Wasserstein parallel transport to perturbations
of its destination measure. By the norm-equivalence of all measures in the admissible class and
Theorem A.3, we know that the second term is bounded by CWPT∥∇φi∥H1(Td)W2(ˆµ∗
i , µ∗
i ). Putting
it together, we obtain
W2(ˆµ∗
i+1, µ∗
i+1) ≤

(1 + Lip(∇φ∗
i )) + ∥∇φi∥H1(Td)CWPT

W2(ˆµ∗
i , µ∗
i ) + O(N−1).
B.8
Proof of Theorem 4.6
Let R > 0, let a ∈Rd and define the test function ψR(x) ≜⟨x, a⟩· χR(x) ∈C1
c (Rd) where
χR(x) ∈C1(Rd) and χR ≡1 on B(0, R) and χR ≡0 outside B(0, 2R) and ∥∇χR(x)∥≲R−1 for all
x. This means that
∇ψR(x) = a · χR(x) + ⟨x, a⟩∇χR(x)
Since ∥x∥2/R ≤2 on the support of ∇χR, we can say
|∇ψR(x)| ≤C∥a∥2
for some C independent of R, and ∇ψR(x) →a as R →∞. Since ∇φt ∈L2(νt; Rd) for all t, we
know that
Z 1
0
Z
Rd ∥∇φt∥2 dνtdt < ∞.
Applying the dominated convergence theorem yields,
Z
Rd⟨∇ψR, ∇φt⟩dνt →
Z
Rd⟨a, ∇φt⟩dνt.
Further note that ∥ψR(x)∥2 ≤∥a∥2∥x∥2, and for all t ∈[0, 1]
Z
Rd ∥x∥2∥a∥2 dνt ≤∥a∥2M
for some M independent of t. Applying the dominated convergence theorem again implies that
Z
Rd ψR(x) dνt →
Z
Rd⟨x, a⟩dνt.
Further let η(t) ∈C1
c ((0, 1)) and define ϕR(x, t) ≜η(t)ψR(x). Since ∇φt is the tangent velocity at
νt, we have
Z 1
0
Z
Rd ∂tϕR dνtdt +
Z 1
0
Z
Rd⟨∇ϕR, ∇φt⟩dνtdt = 0
58
which implies
Z 1
0
η′(t)
Z
Rd ψR dνt
|
{z
}
≜FR(t)
dt = −
Z 1
0
η(t)
Z
Rd⟨∇ψR(x), ∇φt(x)⟩dνt
|
{z
}
≜GR(t)
dt.
Thus, GR(t) is the weak derivative of FR(t) – in particular, this means that for a.e. t,
d
dt
Z
Rd χR(x) ⟨a, x⟩dνt(x) =
Z
Rd⟨∇ψR(x), ∇φt(x)⟩dνt.
Passing to the limit yields
d
dt
Z
Rd ⟨a, x⟩dνt(x) =
Z
Rd⟨a, ∇φt(x)⟩dνt
|
{z
}
Tt
.
By the same logic, we arrive at the analogous conclusion for µ∗
t . In particular,
d
dt
Z
Rd⟨a, x⟩dµ∗
t (x) =
Z
Rd⟨a, ∇φ∗
t ⟩dµ∗
t
|
{z
}
T ∗
t
.
Thus if we can show Tt = T ∗
t , then
d
dt
Z
Rd⟨a, x⟩dνt(x) = d
dt
Z
Rd⟨a, x⟩dµ∗
t (x)
∀a ∈Rd
which implies the theorem statement. By the isometry of parallel transport,
T ∗
t = ⟨a, ∇φ∗
t ⟩L2(µ∗
t ) = ⟨PTµ∗
t →νt(a), ∇φt⟩L2(νt).
By Proposition B.1, we know that PTµ∗
t →νt(a) = a, implying that T ∗
t = Tt almost everywhere.
Proposition B.1 (Wasserstein Parallel Transport preserves constant fields.). Let (λt)t∈[0,1] be a
regular curve of measures in P2(Rd) with a tangent velocity field ∇φt, and let a ∈Rd. Then for
any t0, t1 ∈[0, 1] we have
PTλt0→λt1(a) = a.
Proof. To prove the statement, we need to show that
∇· (λt(∂ta + ∇a · ∇φt)) = 0
for a.e. t. Since a is unchanging in t or spatially, both terms in the parentheses are zero and the
equation is trivially satisfied.
B.9
Supplementary Results
Lemma B.2 (Gr¨onwall’s Inequality). Suppose d
dtf(t) ≤u(t)f(t)+c for t ≥0 where c is a constant.
Then
f(t) ≤f(0) exp
Z t
0
u(s) ds

+ c
Z t
0
exp
Z t
s
u(r) dr

ds.
59
Proof. Let µ(t) = exp(−
R t
0 u(s) ds) and observe that d
dtµ(t) = −µ(t)u(t). Now multiply both sides
of the inequality in the hypothesis by µ(t),
µ(t) d
dtf(t) ≤µ(t)u(t)f(t) + cµ(t)
and observe that d
dt(µ(t)f(t)) = −µ(t)u(t)f(t) + µ(t) d
dtf(t). Thus,
d
dt (µ(t)f(t)) ≤cµ(t).
Integrating from s = 0 to s = t gives
µ(t)f(t) ≤f(0) + c
Z t
0
µ(s) ds
and multiplying through by µ(t)−1 gives
f(t) ≤f(0) exp
Z t
0
u(s) ds

+
Z t
0
exp
Z t
s
u(r) dr

ds.
Proposition B.3 (Bounded Linear Operator). Define the linear operator A : H →L2(µ; Rd) to be
Af = ∇f. Under the hypotheses of Theorem 3.12, A is a bounded linear operator.
Proof. By the derivative reproducing property shown in Theorem 3.11, we know that ∂jf(x) =
⟨ψj(x), f⟩H. Thus for all x ∈Rd
∥∇f(x)∥2
2 =
d
X
i=1
|⟨ψi(x), f⟩H|2 ≤∥f∥2
H
d
X
i=1
∥ψi(x)∥2
H ≤∥f∥2
Hκ2.
It follows that ∥∇f∥2
L2(µ) ≤κ2∥f∥2
H implying that ∥A∥op ≤κ and A is indeed a bounded linear
operator.
Lemma B.4. For s →0 and a fixed constant C > 0, (1 + Cs2)1/s = 1 + Cs + O(s2).
Proof. We will start by obtaining an asymptotic expression for the log of the quantity of interest,
log

(1 + Cs2)1/s
= 1
s log(1 + Cs2)
= 1
s

Cs2 −C2s4
2
+ C3s6
3
+ O(s8)

since log(1 + u) = u −u2
2 + u3
3 + O(u4) for u →0. Multiplying out and exponentiating yields
(1 + Cs2)1/s = exp

Cs −C2s3
2
+ C3s5
3
+ O(s7)

= 1 + Cs + O(s2)
since eu = 1 + u + O(u2) for u →0.
60
Lemma B.5. Let (Ω, ∥· ∥Ω) be a normed measurable space, let λ0, λ1 ∈P2(Ω), and let v : Ω→Ω
be measurable and spatially Lipschitz. If v ∈L2(λ0; Ω), then also v ∈L2(λ1; Ω). Moreover,
∥v∥2
L2(λ1) ≤2∥v∥2
L2(λ0) + 2Lip(v)2W 2
2 (λ0, λ1).
Proof. Let γ be an optimal coupling of λ0 and λ1, and let (X, Y ) ∼γ. Then
∥v(Y )∥2
Ω≤2∥v(X)∥2
Ω+ 2∥v(Y ) −v(X)∥2
Ω
≤2∥v(X)∥2
Ω+ 2Lip(v)2∥Y −X∥2
Ω.
Taking expectations yields
Z
∥v∥2
Ωdλ1 = E∥v(Y )∥2
Ω≤2E∥v(X)∥2
Ω+ 2Lip(v)2E∥X −Y ∥2
Ω
= 2
Z
∥v∥2
Ωdλ0 + 2Lip(v)2W 2
2 (λ0, λ1) < ∞.
Thus v ∈L2(λ1; Ω).
C
RKHS Derivation
RKHS Empirical Objective.
We now derive the empirical objective and the associated linear
system for the RKHS-based Helmholtz projection estimator introduced in Section 3.4. Let H be
a scalar RKHS on Rd with a twice-differentiable kernel K ∈C2(Rd × Rd). By Theorem 3.11, any
minimizer of
ˆfλ ∈arg min
f∈H
 
1
n
n
X
i=1
∥∇f(xi) −v(xi)∥2
2 + λ∥f∥2
H
!
admits a representation of the form
ˆfλ(·) =
n
X
i=1
⟨ci, ∇2K(xi, ·)⟩,
where ∇2 denotes the gradient with respect to the second argument of K and ci ∈Rd. Equivalently,
writing ci = (ci1, . . . , cid)⊤,
ˆfλ(·) =
n
X
i=1
d
X
a=1
cia ∂2,aK(xi, ·).
Define the stacked coefficient vector and the stacked target vector
c ≜(c⊤
1 , . . . , c⊤
n )⊤∈Rnd,
v ≜
 v(x1)⊤, . . . , v(xn)⊤⊤∈Rnd.
Gradients of the representer expansion.
Differentiating ˆfλ with respect to its argument
gives, for each j ∈{1, . . . , n},
∇ˆfλ(xj) =
n
X
i=1
∇2
2K(xi, xj)ci,
where ∇2
2K(xi, xj) ∈Rd×d is the Hessian with respect to the second argument. Thus, if we define
the block matrix D ∈Rnd×nd by
Dji ≜∇2
2K(xi, xj) ∈Rd×d,
61
for i, j ∈{1, . . . , n}, then the stacked fitted gradients satisfy


∇ˆfλ(x1)
...
∇ˆfλ(xn)

= Dc.
RKHS norm of the representer expansion.
Now we will compute ∥ˆfλ∥2
H. By bilinearity of
the RKHS inner product,
∥ˆfλ∥2
H =
* n
X
i=1
d
X
a=1
cia ∂2,aK(xi, ·),
n
X
j=1
d
X
b=1
cjb ∂2,bK(xj, ·)
+
H
=
n
X
i,j=1
d
X
a,b=1
ciacjb ⟨∂2,aK(xi, ·), ∂2,bK(xj, ·)⟩H .
By the derivative reproducing property,
⟨∂2,aK(xi, ·), ∂2,bK(xj, ·)⟩H = ∂1,a∂2,bK(xi, xj).
Therefore, if we define the block Gram matrix G ∈Rnd×nd by
Gij ≜∇1∇2K(xi, xj) ∈Rd×d,
for i, j ∈{1, . . . , n} then
∥ˆfλ∥2
H = c⊤Gc.
The empirical objective in coefficient form.
Substituting the expressions above into the
empirical objective yields
J(c) = 1
n∥Dc −v∥2
2 + λ c⊤Gc.
Expanding J(c),
J(c) = 1
n(Dc −v)⊤(Dc −v) + λc⊤Gc.
Differentiating with respect to c gives
∇cJ(c) = 2
nD⊤(Dc −v) + 2λGc.
Hence any minimizer c⋆satisfies the normal equations
D⊤D c⋆+ nλG c⋆= D⊤v,
or equivalently,
 D⊤D + nλG

c⋆= D⊤v.
Whenever D⊤D + nλG is invertible, the minimizer is unique and given by
c⋆=
 D⊤D + nλG
−1D⊤v.
Note that the simplified one-matrix formula
J(c) = 1
n∥Hc −v∥2
2 + λc⊤Hc,
c⋆= (H + nλInd)−1v,
is recovered under the additional identification D = G = H (with H symmetric).
62
D
Implementation Details
Our implementation of the algorithms described in Section 3.2, Section 3.4 and Section 4 is available
at
https://github.com/TristanSaidi/WassersteinPT.
The codebase contains the main routines for approximate Wasserstein parallel transport and coun-
terfactual dynamics prediction, together with supporting geometry and experiment code. In par-
ticular, the public repository includes source files pt.py, cf recon.py, and geom.py.
Empirical optimal transport and tangent estimation.
In the theoretical development, Al-
gorithm 1 is written in terms of the Brenier map and the Wasserstein logarithmic map. In the
empirical setting, however, we work with empirical measures
ˆν =
n
X
i=1
aiδxi,
ˆµ =
m
X
j=1
bjδyj,
and we compute an optimal coupling
Γ⋆∈Rn×m
+
for the quadratic transport cost. Concretely, Γ⋆is obtained by solving the discrete optimal transport
problem
min
Γ∈Π(a,b)
n
X
i=1
m
X
j=1
Γij∥xi −yj∥2
2,
where Π(a, b) denotes the set of nonnegative matrices with row sums a and column sums b. Given
the optimal coupling, we convert it into a tangent vector by barycentric projection. That is, for
each source support point xi, we define the empirical transport target
¯yi ≜
Pm
j=1 Γ⋆
ijyj
Pm
j=1 Γ⋆
ij
,
and then set the empirical tangent vector to be
ˆv(xi) ≜¯yi −xi = 1
ai
m
X
j=1
Γ⋆
ij(yj −xi).
Thus, in practice, the logarithmic map is approximated by the displacement induced by the barycen-
tric projection of the empirical OT plan. When the discrete coupling is supported on a map, this
reduces to the usual pointwise displacement T(xi) −xi; when mass from xi splits across multi-
ple targets, the barycentric projection provides the canonical single-vector summary used by the
implementation.
Weighted aggregation when the barycentric projection is not injective.
A practical
complication arises in the iterative parallel transport procedure when the empirical barycentric
projection is not injective. In that case, multiple source support points may be mapped to the same
destination support point after one transport step. A naive pointwise pullback or pushforward of
tangent vectors is then ill-posed, because there is no unique source vector at the destination location.
To handle this, the implementation performs a weighted aggregation of the transported vectors.
Suppose the current tangent field is represented by vectors z1, . . . , zn on source locations x1, . . . , xn,
63
and suppose the one-step empirical transport from the current support to the next support is
represented by a coupling matrix Γ.
For each destination point yj, we define the transported
tangent by the conditional barycenter
˜zj ≜
Pn
i=1 Γijzi
Pn
i=1 Γij
.
Equivalently, the new vector at a destination support point is the mass-weighted average of all
incoming vectors under the one-step coupling. This aggregation rule has two desirable properties.
First, it is consistent with the deterministic case: if the step is induced by an injective map,
then each destination point has exactly one preimage and the formula above simply recovers the
transported vector associated with that preimage. Second, when several source points merge, it
preserves the correct mass weighting induced by the empirical transport plan rather than arbitrarily
selecting one source vector. In this sense, the discrete implementation uses the coupling itself to
define the natural empirical analogue of transporting a tangent field through a non-invertible step.
We also note that under standard regularity assumptions the barycentric projection of the empirical
optimal coupling converges to the population Brenier map in the large-sample limit (Deb et al.,
2021, Theorem 2.2 and Corollary 2.3).
RKHS projection via random Fourier features.
Section 3.4 describes the Helmholtz-Hodge
projection step through a kernel gradient regression problem in an RKHS. The exact formulation
leads to a linear system involving a block kernel matrix whose size scales with both the sample
size and the ambient dimension. In practice, this becomes a computational bottleneck in the high-
dimensional settings considered in our experiments. To reduce both runtime and memory usage, the
implementation replaces the exact kernel expansion with a random Fourier feature approximation.
Specifically, for a shift-invariant kernel K, we use a feature map ϕ : Rd →RD such that
K(x, y) ≈ϕ(x)⊤ϕ(y),
where D is the number of random features. We then parameterize the scalar potential as
fθ(x) = θ⊤ϕ(x),
θ ∈RD,
so that the projected vector field is represented by
∇fθ(x) = Jϕ(x)⊤θ,
with Jϕ(x) denoting the Jacobian of the feature map. Under this approximation, the empirical
projection problem becomes a finite-dimensional ridge regression problem in the feature parameters
θ:
min
θ∈RD
1
n
n
X
i=1
Jϕ(xi)⊤θ −v(xi)
2
2 + λ∥θ∥2
2.
This avoids forming the full nd×nd kernel matrix from the exact representer expansion, and instead
works with feature matrices whose width is the chosen number of random features. Consequently,
the memory complexity is reduced from kernel-matrix storage to feature-matrix storage, and the
resulting linear algebra is substantially faster in the regimes relevant to our experiments.
64
