Spectral methods: crucial for machine learning, natural for quantum computers?
Vasilis Belis, Joseph Bowles, Rishabh Gupta, Evan Peters, and Maria Schuld∗
Xanadu Quantum Technologies Inc., Toronto, Ontario, M5G 2C8, Canada
(Dated: March 27, 2026)
This article presents an argument for why quantum computers could unlock new methods for
machine learning. We argue that spectral methods, in particular those that learn, regularise, or
otherwise manipulate the Fourier spectrum of a machine learning model, are often natural for
quantum computers.
For example, if a generative machine learning model is represented by a
quantum state, the Quantum Fourier Transform allows us to manipulate the Fourier spectrum of
the state using the entire toolbox of quantum routines, an operation that is usually prohibitive
for classical models. At the same time, spectral methods are surprisingly fundamental to machine
learning: A spectral bias has recently been hypothesised to be the core principle behind the success
of deep learning; support vector machines have been known for decades to regularise in Fourier space,
and convolutional neural nets build filters in the Fourier space of images. Could, then, quantum
computing open fundamentally different, much more direct and resource-efficient ways to design
the spectral properties of a model? We discuss this potential in detail here, hoping to stimulate a
direction in quantum machine learning research that puts the question of “why quantum?” first.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the search for real-world applications for quantum
computers, there is a growing consensus that cryptoanal-
ysis and quantum simulation are the most mature pro-
posals at this stage, and finding others “has proven re-
markably difficult” [1]. Both are also somewhat excep-
tional: cryptography is arguably the most structured of
all real-world problems, and quantum chemistry shares
its very theoretical foundations with quantum comput-
ers. In this perspective we propose a motivation for an
application area where a clear-cut bridge has been elusive
so far [2]: machine learning.
Besides attracting excessive attention in academic and
industrial research, quantum machine learning [3–5] has
struggled to make a clear case for why quantum com-
puting should be of fundamental interest for generalis-
ing from data. For example, speeding up linear algebra
[6–9] fails to convincingly account for the time it takes
to load big matrices into a realistic quantum computer;
“Quantum Neural Networks” [10, 11] still need to prove
that they deserve their spot in the gallery of scalable,
performant models [12–14], and reverting to the analy-
sis of “quantum data” [15, 16] needs to make a case for
why leaving states unmeasured is critical to learn their
properties in practically relevant situations. Why, then,
should we believe that quantum computers are useful for
machine learning?
Here we discuss a potential answer to this question. It
rests on the observation that “spectral methods”—which
we define loosely as the design of machine learning mod-
els with desirable properties in Fourier space—are funda-
mental to a core principle of learning [17]: to find simple
models in expressive model classes. At the same time,
quantum algorithms often rely on, or can be understood
∗In alphabetical order
FIG. 1. A common simplicity bias of machine learning models
is their smoothness, which is linked to a decay of the model
function’s Fourier spectrum.
But designing such a decay
in Fourier space is usually computationally expensive. Can
quantum computers help here?
by, Fourier analysis. The main point of this paper is to
explain why this connection could be a fruitful starting
point for the design of quantum machine learning algo-
rithms.
As an illustrative example for the importance of spec-
tral methods in machine learning, consider a probability
distribution p(x) that tells us how likely it is to sam-
ple a data point x ∈RN.
Simple models intuitively
correspond to smooth distributions p(x), where we use
“smooth” broadly to mean Lipschitz and infinitely dif-
ferentiable functions. Such models are robust to input
perturbations: when we change the input a little, the
probability p(x+δ) should not change a lot. Furthermore,
smooth models have special properties in Fourier space:
their spectrum decays super-polynomially (see Figure 1).
This can be intuitively seen by considering the Fourier
decomposition of p(x),
p(x) =
1
√
2π
Z
Ω
ˆp(ω)e−2πixωdω,
(1)
arXiv:2603.24654v1  [quant-ph]  25 Mar 2026
2
where ˆp(ω) are the Fourier coefficients and ω ∈Ω⊂RN
the frequencies. Functions that are smooth will be com-
posed of weakly oscillating basis functions e−2πixω, and
therefore have small coefficients ˆp(ω) for large frequencies
|ω| in Eq. 1.
There has been growing recognition in the machine
learning community that smoothness is crucial for a
model to learn and generalise from data. To this end, an
abundance of techniques have been developed for impos-
ing smoothness [18–21]. At the same time, these heuris-
tic techniques are indirect and are often computationally
inefficient [22], and so imposing model smoothness has
remained out of reach of these classical methods.
As
shown above, the important concept of a simplicity bias
in learning translates to a clearly defined behaviour in
Fourier space that can help design models, an idea with a
powerful group-theoretic generalisation that we will deal
with in depth here [23, 24].
Given that regularisation, or biasing a machine learn-
ing method towards simple models, is one of the most
fundamental themes in machine learning, it is curious
that spectral methods enforcing smoothness in Fourier
space are not more prominent in the canonical knowl-
edge base of researchers (and, by extension, scarce in the
literature of quantum machine learning). A reason might
be the computational challenge of working in the Fourier
space of a large model, which is often only accessible indi-
rectly via the convolution theorem. This theorem states
that changing the Fourier coefficients ˆf of a model by
multiplying it with a filter ˆg in Fourier space corresponds
to a convolution in direct space:
(f ∗g)(x) =
Z
X
f(y)g(x −y)dy = F−1( ˆf · ˆg).
(2)
In machine learning, the function g—whose Fourier coef-
ficients ˆg make up the filter—is usually known as a (sta-
tionary) kernel. As a consequence, a wide range of kernel
methods, which were the workhorse of machine learning
in the 1990’s and early 2000’s [25, 26] and are widely used
for small-to-medium data problems, can be thought of as
spectral regularisation methods. The same is true for ker-
nel tools like the Maximum Mean Discrepancy employed
to train implicit generative models [27, 28].
Likewise,
convolutional layers of neural networks, and their group-
theoretic generalisations [29, 30] such as graph neural
networks [31], design a model class by shaping the Fourier
spectrum with a filter (although this filter acts on the
image rather than the model function, which is compu-
tationally much easier). Last but not least, the convolu-
tion theorem helps to empirically probe how deep learn-
ing works: The spectral bias hypothesis [32, 33] states
that the complex model class of vastly overparametrised
neural networks learns to match the ground truth’s fre-
quency from smallest (i.e., the “smoothest” component)
to largest (the most oscillating component). All these ob-
servations point towards the fact that the Fourier spec-
trum of a model is a crucial mathematical object to study
and design good machine learning models, but that we
have to rely on indirect access to Fourier space due to
computational challenges.
Let us now consider a machine learning model that is
represented by a trainable [34, 35] quantum state |ψθ⟩.
How can quantum computers possibly help to access or
shape the model’s Fourier spectrum more directly? As
we will see, there are many possible answers to this ques-
tion, which intimately depend on how the model is de-
fined, and how its spectrum is supposed to be designed.
For example, if we consider the probability of a mea-
surement outcome, p(x) = |⟨x|ψθ⟩|2, as an implicit gen-
erative model [36, 37] we can use the Quantum Fourier
Transform (QFT) [38] to apply a Fourier transform to
the amplitudes of the quantum state,
X
x
ψθ(x) |x⟩→
X
ω
ˆψθ(ω) |ω⟩.
(3)
While the QFT is usually associated with the dis-
crete Fourier transform of the amplitudes as a func-
tion on ZN, this process is known to be efficient in the
number of amplitudes for many groups1 which implies
an exponential—or sometimes even super-exponential—
speedup compared to the classical Fast Fourier Trans-
form. Once in the Fourier basis, we can use the entire
arsenal of quantum algorithms to manipulate the Fourier
spectrum, for example to impose (possibly learnable) bi-
ases towards lower-order coefficients.
Another example of how quantum machine learning re-
lates to spectral methods is given by a prominent class
of supervised quantum machine learning models known
as “Quantum Neural Networks” [10, 11]. These models
encode an input vector x ∈RN into a trainable state
|ψθ(x)⟩, and define a model as an observable expectation
f(x) = ⟨ψθ(x)| O |ψθ(x)⟩. The standard data-embedding
strategy encodes the entries xi of x via gates of the
form exp (ixiH), where H is a Hermitian operator. The
resemblance to Fourier basis functions leads to feature
maps that have elegant interpretations via Fourier anal-
ysis, and induce different kinds of spectral biases into
Quantum Neural Networks [39–42], as well as to dequan-
tisation methods [43, 44]. Here, an embedding strategy,
rather than a QFT, designs the Fourier spectrum of a
quantum model.
While not a main focus of this paper, we want to re-
mark that we can also use spectral methods more in-
directly, namely to access more sophisticated algebraic
properties of the model which relate to its simplicity. A
possible example is a recent variation of the famous quan-
tum algorithms solving Hidden Subgroup Problems [45]
such as Shor’s algorithm. Given several copies of a quan-
tum state—which may represent a generative model—we
1 The discrete Fourier transform on the amplitudes is performed
by the “standard” Fourier transform, while a layer of Hadamard
gates implements the Walsh or “boolean” Fourier transform, and
a rather complicated circuit is known to exist for a Fourier trans-
form over the symmetric group.
3
can probe the (un)entanglement structure of the state
[46, 47], which opens up methods of influencing the sim-
plicity of a model in terms of its entanglement.
We believe that these examples are just the tip of a
large iceberg of spectral learning methods unlocked by
quantum computers that wait to be uncovered. Our hope
is to stimulate more work in this field, and to find satis-
fying answers to why quantum theory should fundamen-
tally help learning from data—be it classical or quantum.
Important questions are, for example:
• Can quantum models design a soft spectral bias
without reverting to vast scales used in deep learn-
ing?
• Can they extend the success of geometric deep
learning to implement useful biases, but on in-
tractably large model spaces (rather than on a
tractable image)?
• Can group structure help to achieve tailor-made
regularisation for data domains that standard
methods still struggle with, such as graphs, spheres
and permutations?
• What limitations arise from the fact that we can
only apply Fourier transforms to amplitudes, but
not to probabilities directly? What can we do with
the sampling access we have to quantum informa-
tion?
• What are the limitations of classical kernel meth-
ods, and can we go beyond them with spectral
methods in quantum machine learning?
While these questions are wide open, the goal of this
article (which we understand as a mix of perspective,
tutorial and review) is to collect the technical tools nec-
essary to start research in the spectral approach to quan-
tum machine learning.
We will start with a motivating example in Section II
that intends to give a concrete intuition for the poten-
tial and pitfalls of spectral methods in quantum machine
learning. Section III then lays the mathematical founda-
tions of group Fourier transforms. Section IV gives an
overview of spectral methods in classical machine learn-
ing, and, for three examples, shows why the Fourier spec-
trum of a model relates to its simplicity. We define the
important tool of quantum Fourier transforms in Sec-
tion V and look a little deeper into Fourier spectra of
states that encode quantum models. Finally, Section VI
gives an overview of existing lines of research that make
use of Fourier methods in quantum machine learning.
We conclude by commenting on the potential of this ap-
proach.
II.
A MOTIVATING EXAMPLE
To build intuition, we want to start with a simple toy
example of how a generative quantum model can be de-
signed in Fourier space using the QFT. We will work with
binary-valued data and a simple non-parametric model—
a model that is directly constructed from the training
data with no tunable parameters—to generate samples
that are similar to the training examples. The idea is to
start with the empirical distribution that only has sup-
port in the training data, and apply a low-pass filter in
Fourier space to “smoothen” this distribution and hence
remove finite-sample effects. This principle can be imple-
mented with quantum and classical methods, and allows
us to illustrate themes that are encountered repeatedly
when working with spectral methods in quantum ma-
chine learning:
• Desirable model properties are often explicit in
Fourier space.
Here we will use the fact that
smooth models have a decaying Fourier spectrum,
which was already discussed in the introduction.
• We need to capture the data structure by using an
appropriate group for the Fourier transform.
In
this example we use the group Z2 × Z2 × · · · = Zn
2,
the set {0, 1}n with addition modulo 2. This cap-
tures the properties of binary random variables,
and is closely related with quantum computation.
• Quantum algorithms can sometimes act directly in
Fourier space. Quantum machine learning models
can often move into the Fourier basis, and hence
manipulate the Fourier spectrum of the amplitudes
of a quantum model using tools from the quantum
algorithms toolbox. These tools also define the fun-
damental limitations on what we can do.
• Quantum methods manipulate the Fourier coeffi-
cients of amplitudes, not those of the measured in-
formation.
This property, an implication of the
Born rule, can be a bug or feature of quantum
model design in Fourier space.
Here we will see
how this property amplifies the model’s desired de-
cay in Fourier space, but mismatches lower-order
Fourier coefficients.
• The computational cost of quantum and classical
algorithms based on Fourier transforms are subtle.
We will show that, while in general classically in-
tractable, a naive spectral design approach can be
classically implemented by a kernel method.
A.
Smoothness for models over binary data
Let us start by defining a generative learning problem:
Problem 1. Learning to generate bitstrings. Given
a training set of bitstrings x ∈{0, 1}n sampled from an
unknown distribution p(x), generate new bitstrings from
that distribution.
4
This learning problem is unsolvable without further
assumptions, as lots of distributions have a high proba-
bility of generating the training set—how can we guess
which was the right one? As discussed in the introduc-
tion, an implicit assumption of many machine learning
models for real-life problems is that the ground truth is
smooth. Informally, smoothness means that data which
is “close” to high-probability samples also have a high
probability.
Of course, closeness is not always a clear
term when dealing with discrete data. We will therefore
motivate the expected parities of subsets of bits as a mea-
sure of smoothness for binary data, which will turn out
to be Fourier coefficients of the model p(x), at least if we
use the appropriate Fourier transform for the group Zn
2,
the Walsh-Hadamard transform.
Intuitively, a probability distribution p : {0, 1}n →
[0, 1], is considered smooth if its value does not change
drastically when a small number of bits are flipped. We
can link this to a property of the parity functions
χk(x) = (−1)x·k,
(4)
where k ∈{0, 1}n is another bitstring, and x·k is the dot
product modulo 2, e.g., 101 · 111 = (1 · 1 + 0 · 1 + 1 · 1)
mod 2 = 0.
In words, the 1-entries of a given k act
to select bits in x, and the parity function returns 1 if
there are an even number of 1s among these bits, and
−1 if there are an odd number of bits.
A k is large
(and the corresponding parity function is of high order)
if it contains many 1s, and hence checks the parity of a
large number of bits in x. The number of 1s is called the
Hamming weight of k. For a given k we can define the
(normalised) expected parity of a distribution as
Ep [χk(x)] =
1
√
2n
X
x∈{0,1}n
p(x)(−1)x·k.
(5)
The expected parities allow us to make the idea of
smoothness of probabilistic models over binary data pre-
cise: Smooth bitstring distributions have expected pari-
ties that decay for higher orders. This property is easy to
intuitively understand. Take, for example, the highest-
order k = 1...1: the parity χ1..1(x) is extremely sensitive
to noise in x, as flipping only one bit randomly will al-
ways change the parity. A distribution that has a large
value Ep [χ1..1(x)] needs to have very different probabil-
ities for x that are just one bitflip away—it is not very
robust.
As mentioned, it turns out that the expected parities
Ep [χk(x)] are the Fourier coefficients of p(x) when us-
ing the natural Fourier transform over the boolean cube
(known as the Walsh(-Hadamard) transform). As a con-
sequence, we can assume from now on that smooth bit-
string distributions have a decaying Fourier spectrum.
To generalise from training data, a good strategy is to
work with a model that has a bias towards smoothness.
This is what we will construct next.
B.
Smoothing the Fourier spectrum of the data
Most generative models in machine learning, includ-
ing most diffusion models, energy-based models, flows,
and variational autoencoders, define a model class, take
a random initial model, and train it to maximize the like-
lihood of seeing the data. We could follow this strategy,
and construct a class of functions that has a decaying
Fourier spectrum (in fact, this is what a support vector
machine does for supervised learning [26]). But we could
also do something more direct (see Figure 2)—something
that could be elegantly implemented in a quantum model:
impose a bias directly to the Fourier coefficients
EpX [χk(x)] =
1
√
2n|X|
X
x∈X
(−1)x·k
(6)
of the empirical distribution pX that only has support
on the training data X ⊆{0, 1}n.
These “empirical”
Fourier coefficients can be understood as a noisy ver-
sion of the true ones. Since the empirical distribution is
sparse, its Fourier spectrum is dense, and therefore has
large higher-order coefficients.
We know these higher-
order coefficients should be zero for a smooth distribu-
tion, and so we can therefore consider them to be ar-
tifacts of a finite data set. In particular, since (−1)k·x
can be seen as a Bernoulli random variable when x is
sampled from p(x), the coefficients (6) are unbiased esti-
mates of the true coefficients (5) with an absolute error
that scales as 1/
p
2n|X|. Since higher-order coefficients
are effectively zero for the true distribution, this means
that the relative error of the empirical Fourier coefficients
is much larger at higher order.
The spectral bias should therefore suppress higher-
order coefficients, to ensure a smooth distribution and
correct for these finite-data artifacts. On the other hand,
since the lower order coefficients are not zero and we do
not know their values a priori, it should not change them
much beyond the 1/
p
2n|X| estimation error. For exam-
ple, if all training points start with a 1 bit, it is reasonable
to assume that the expected parity of the ground truth
for k = 10000 is close to 1, which means that new sam-
ples also have a 1 bit in this position. The idea is hence
to “denoise” the data by applying something that would
be called a low-pass filter in signal processing. Note that
while we will do this with a “hard” strategy in this didac-
tic example, ultimately such a bias will have to be learnt
to build performant models (which is why we suggestively
denote the final bandlimited model by a subscript θ).
The considerations so far suggest the following spectral
strategy to solve the generative learning task:
Model 1. Empirical smoothing We are given a set X
of data samples and want to solve Problem 1.
1. Start with the empirical distribution
pX (x) =
1
|X|
X
x∈{0,1}n
I[x ∈X],
(7)
5
FIG. 2. A sketch of the idea of smoothing an empirical dis-
tribution of training samples in Fourier space. The empirical
distribution is sparse, with support only on the training data.
Therefore, its Fourier spectrum is dense and has support on
high-order frequencies which can be seen as a consequence of
finite data effects. By applying a low-pass filter in Fourier
space we impose smoothness on the resulting distribution.
where I is the indicator function that is one if x is
a training sample, and zero elsewhere.
2. Move into the Zn
2 Fourier space using the Walsh
transform
ˆpX (k) =
1
√
2n
X
x∈X
1
|X|(−1)k·x.
(8)
3. Apply a (possibly learnable) filter in Fourier space
that suppresses higher-order Fourier coefficients,
but keeps the lower-order Fourier coefficients ap-
proximately intact.
4. Move back to direct space.
5. Sample from the model.
For example, we could apply a decay that depends on
the Hamming weight of the Fourier coefficient, which is
implemented in Figure 3.
When we move back into direct space, we get a dif-
ferent (and typically dense) probability distribution—we
have generalised from the training data (see Figure 3).
In fact, since for boolean functions the Fourier decom-
position is a kind of polynomial decomposition, what we
just did is a (hard, and not learnable) order-based regu-
larisation strategy as suggested in [17].
C.
Implementation with quantum models
The strategy sketched above can be easily translated
into a quantum algorithm:
Model
2. Empirical
smoothing
with
quantum
models We are again given a set X of data samples and
want to solve Problem 1, but this time we use a quantum
state as a generative model.
1. Start with a superposition of the training data,
|ψX ⟩=
1
p
|X|
X
x∈X
|x⟩
(9)
2. Apply the Zn
2 Fourier transform to this state, which
is implemented by applying a Hadamard gate onto
each qubit,
| ˆψX ⟩=
1
p
2n|X|
X
k
X
x∈X
(−1)x·k |k⟩.
(10)
3. Apply a (potentially non-unitary) quantum trans-
formation that modifies the amplitudes of the quan-
tum state in Fourier space.
4. Move back into direct space by applying an inverse
Fourier transform, another layer of Hadamards.
5. Measure in the computational basis to generate a
sample from the model.
It is important to note that manipulating the Fourier
spectrum of the amplitudes ψ(x) (Step 3) of the quantum
state is an indirect way to manipulate those of the mea-
surement distribution (i.e., the final probabilistic model),
which is given by the Born rule,
p(x) = |ψ(x)|2.
(11)
The Fourier coefficients of ψ(x) and p(x) are related by an
autoconvolution, as we will see in Section V C. Compar-
ing Figures 3 and 4 shows that the spectral manipulation
of amplitudes leads to an attenuated profile of the final
model compared to the same manipulation being applied
to probabilities. Furthermore, unitary transforms on the
amplitudes can lead to non-linear transformations of the
distribution’s Fourier spectrum. Depending on the appli-
cation, working with amplitudes can therefore be a bug
or feature for model design.
Of course, quantum computing imposes fundamental
constraints on how to manipulate the Fourier spectrum
of the state in Step 3. For example, we can naively im-
plement the noise filter used in Figure 3 on the ampli-
tudes as shown in Figure 4 by using a quantum algo-
rithm that conditionally rotates an ancilla state by an
angle of 2 arcsin(1 −2θ) when a 1 is encountered in |k⟩.
Post-selecting on the ancilla, we end up with a state that
re-weighted the amplitudes in Fourier space according to
the noise filter.
A fundamental limitation of this sim-
ple approach is the success probability of post-selection,
which prohibits arbitrarily strong bandlimiting at large
scales.
More sophisticated techniques [48, 49] may be
able to push the boundaries, but always incur a price for
highly non-unitary operations.
A more successful approach may involve opting for a
unitary layer that—rather than attempting to bandlimit
the amplitudes of the quantum state probabilistically—
applies a deterministic phase mask to the amplitudes so
6
FIG. 3. An example of smoothing an empirical distribution in Fourier space to solve the generative learning problem. Starting
from an empirical distribution pX of four binary data samples (top left), we compute the (Walsh) Fourier spectrum (bottom
left). We then apply a filter of the form ˆpθ(k) = (1 −2θ)|k|ˆpX (k), where θ ∈[0, 1] controls the spectral decay rate. Moving
back into direct space, we get a model that generalised from the training data by making the empirical distribution smoother.
that the resulting interference from autoconvolution au-
tocorrelation results in an effective low-pass filter on the
spectrum of the model’s probability distribution.
Ultimately, a flexible model also requires the transfor-
mation to be learnt, which suggests the use of scalable
variational circuits that come with an additional set of
challenges.2 In summary, quantum computers can effi-
ciently manipulate the Fourier spectrum of the ampli-
tudes of a quantum model state, but if we can design
good Fourier filters within the constraints of quantum
algorithms will be a crucial question for spectral meth-
ods in quantum machine learning.
D.
Why empirical smoothing may be classically
hard
We saw that our toy example for a spectral method,
generative empirical smoothing, can at least in princi-
ple be implemented efficiently on a quantum computer.
But how computationally feasible is this strategy classi-
cally? In these last two sections we will argue that brute
force approaches are doomed to fail, but that care has
to be taken when claiming speedups, as some situations
allow for implicit ways to efficiently implement empirical
smoothing.
First, let us have a look at efficiently computing prob-
abilities p(x) after classical empirical smoothing. This
ability would unlock training a classical model, for ex-
ample by taking the model class of bandlimited empiri-
cal distributions and learning the bandlimiting filter us-
2 In upcoming work we study a learnable diagonal phase mask
implemented by trainable IQP circuits [14] as a suitable ansatz
to build filters.
ing maximum likelihood estimation. Computing the k’th
Fourier coefficient of the empirical distribution,
ˆpX (k) =
1
√
2n
X
x∈X
(−1)k·x,
(12)
is efficient, as it is a sum over tractably many terms. Of
course, there are exponentially many such Fourier coeffi-
cients. Computing a single probability from an empirical
distribution that has been bandlimited to contain only a
small number of terms,
pθ(x) =
1
√
2n
X
k∈Ω
ˆg(k)ˆpX (k)(−1)k·x,
(13)
is tractable. Likewise, computing marginal distributions
becomes tractable (by sampling over subsets of Fourier
coefficients), which allows us to compute conditional
probabilities, opening up the ability to sample from pθ(x)
in an autoregressive manner. Is empirical smoothing then
classically tractable?
The issue is the number of Fourier coefficients to keep
track of. For high dimensions, bandlimiting would have
to be limited to a few frequencies in each dimension. For
example, in the slowest-growing case of Zn
2, where there
are two frequencies in each dimension, the number of
Fourier frequencies with Hamming weight |k| less than
some threshold b is given by Pb
m=0
  n
m

. For n = 10, 000
dimensions and b = 2, we would already have to sum
over 50 million Fourier coefficients to compute the prob-
ability of a data point, even for the simplest bandlim-
ited model. For other groups and larger thresholds, this
quickly becomes unfeasible. Furthermore, to keep em-
pirical smoothing classically tractable, the filter for the
k’th coefficient cannot depend on the Fourier coefficients
other than ˆp(k), as there are intractably many of these
(even for the empirical distribution). These two problems
7
FIG. 4.
An example of smoothing empirical distributions with quantum computers, using the same filter as in Figure 3.
Fourier filtering is performed on the amplitudes of the quantum state. We encode the empirical distribution (top left) into a
superposition |ψX ⟩(mid left), to which we apply the (Walsh) Fourier transform (bottom left). We then apply a non-unitary
transformation (with the help of ancillas) to implement the filter ˆψθ(k) ∝(1 −2θ)|k| ˆψX (k) (bottom right).
Moving back
into direct space (mid right), we get a quantum model with a new distribution of amplitudes, whose measurement distribution
constitutes the generative model. Comparing to Figure 3, it is clear that manipulating the Fourier coefficients of the amplitudes
of a quantum model leads to a different generative model, but with a similar structure: high probabilities are amplified and
low ones suppressed.
clearly do not occur for the quantum computer, which
means that empirical smoothing might display quantum
speedups for the useful task of generalisation. Of course,
whether this strategy is able to solve problems that other
approaches to generalisation cannot is an open question.
As a cautionary tale, we want to conclude our analysis
of this toy example by showing that for a specific filter it
can be possible to efficiently sample from a bandlimited
empirical distribution on a classical computer. The trick
is to use convolution with a kernel, a method that we
will discuss later as the standard classical approach for
spectral modeling, and hence the most viable “classical
competitor” for this approach to QML.
E.
Example of a dequantisable filter
While we argued that the direct manipulation of the
Fourier spectrum required in II B is not computationally
feasible in general, it might very well be possible for very
specific Fourier filters.
To illustrate this, consider the
noise filter used as an example in Figure 3:
ˆpθ(k) = (1 −2θ)|k|ˆpX (k),
(14)
where the hyperparameter θ ∈[0, 1] controls the decay
rate. Going back into direct space, we get the model
p(x) =
X
x∈{0,1}n
pX (x)κ(x −y),
(15)
with κ(x, y) = θdH(x,y)(1 −θ)n−dH(x,y), which is known
as the noise kernel. The model can therefore be imple-
mented by a convolution pX ∗κ in direct space. At the
same time, p(x) is a typical kernel density estimation
model, a class of models which define probability distri-
butions as sums of kernel functions centered around the
training data.
Crucially (and this is only true in rare
cases), the kernel has the property that we can sample
from p(x) even in high dimensions: we simply sample
a training data point and flip each bit with probability
θ. This example shows that for some manipulations in
Fourier space, kernel methods can even be used for gen-
erative models. Clearly, there are a lot of restrictions on
the kernel to make this work, but kernel methods have
already been used to dequantise a range of supervised
quantum machine learning models [43, 44] and are a con-
tender for spectral methods.
In summary, the simple example of empirical smooth-
ing showed how (group) spectral methods in machine
learning can be interesting for machine learning and nat-
ural for quantum computers.
But it also highlighted
8
subtleties that have to be handled when designing quan-
tum machine learning models—such as the Born rule, the
difficulty of manipulating amplitudes, and possible clas-
sical dequantisation with kernel methods.
These chal-
lenges appear in many (but not all) spectral approaches
to quantum machine learning. With this illustrative case
in mind, let us now get back to the main argument: why
quantum computers might be useful to implement spec-
tral methods in machine learning.
III.
SPECTRAL METHODS
As mentioned, we loosely consider spectral methods for
machine learning as those that design machine learning
models by manipulating their properties in Fourier space.
In this section we will rigorously define what we mean by
terms like “Fourier spectrum” and “Fourier coefficients”,
in particular in their group-theoretic generalisation.
A.
Motivation
What do Fourier transforms have to do with groups?
Everything, if one looks closely.
Let us motivate this
with one of the most well-known Fourier transforms, the
discrete Fourier transform.
It transforms a sequence
f1, ..., fd of complex numbers into another sequence of
complex numbers.
Sometimes the complex values are
written as a function f(x) evaluated or “sampled” at
regular intervals, for example using integer values x ∈
{0, ..., d −1}. The Fourier coefficients are then given as
ˆf(k) =
1
√
d
d−1
X
x=0
f(x)e2πi kx
d ,
(16)
where the frequencies k are also in {0, ..., d −1}. The
inverse Fourier transform is given as
f(x) =
1
√
d
d−1
X
k=1
ˆf(k)e−2πi kx
d ,
(17)
Note that the normalisation factor is a matter of con-
vention, and we will here always use the “balanced”
version which uses the same pre-factor for the Fourier
transform and its inverse, and keeps the L2 normalisa-
tion of the Fourier coefficient constant. The expressions
e2πi kx
d correspond to Fourier basis functions with integer-
valued frequencies k, and a Fourier coefficient ˆf(k) can
be seen as the projection of f(x) onto the k’th basis
function. The function beyond the interval 0, .., N −1
is thought to be “periodically continued”, which means
that f(x) = f(x + N).
But why do—at least if we do not want to incur ad-
ditional headaches—the x values have to be equidistant?
Why this notion of “periodic continuation”? Why are
the basis functions of exponential form? Why are the k
also integers? And what makes the Fourier basis special?
It turns out that all of these questions have an elegant
answer if we interpret the function domain as a group.
As a reminder, a group is a set of elements that has:
1. an operation that maps two elements a and b of
the set into a third element of the set, for example
c = a + b,
2. an “identity element” e such that e + a = a for any
element a
3. an inverse −a for every element a, such that a +
(−a) = e.
An Abelian group has the property that gg′ = g′g. Its
characters are functions χ : G →C with the property
χ(gg′) = χ(g)χ(g′).
Returning to the discrete Fourier transform, we can
consider the x as elements from the set of integers
{0, ..., d−1}, together with a prescription of how to com-
bine two integers to a third from this set. Choosing “ad-
dition modulo N” for this operation (which means that
(d −1) + 1 = 0), we get the cyclic group Zd. This choice
explains the equidistant property: integers are by nature
equally spaced in R. It also explains the periodic continu-
ation, as x = x+d implies f(x) = f(x+d). Furthermore,
the integer-valued frequencies k turn out to be elements
from the so-called “dual group” ˆG, which in this case
looks exactly like the original one. Finally, the Fourier
basis functions are exactly the characters of Zd (which
form a basis of the space of functions on G), and the
Fourier coefficients hence the projection of f(x) onto the
characters.
Note that other standard Fourier transforms can be
associated with groups as well: A Fourier series trans-
forms periodic functions on the real line with period 2π,
which corresponds to the domain R/Z, while a contin-
uous Fourier transform on real numbers relates to the
group (R, +) (the real numbers under addition). Mul-
tivariate functions, like those over RN, are then defined
over direct products of groups.
B.
Group Fourier transforms
For simplicity, we will focus on discrete groups—which
are most relevant for qubit-based quantum computing—
and follow the insightful presentation in [24]. Continuous
Fourier transforms over locally compact groups simply
turn the sum into an integral over a Haar measure on G.
For discrete Abelian groups, the standard Fourier
transforms generalise as follows:
Definition
1. Fourier
transform
over
Abelian
groups Let G be a discrete Abelian group and χk its char-
acters from the Pontryagin Dual group ˆG. The Fourier
transform F maps a function f : G →C to a function
9
ˆf : ˆG →C:
ˆf(k) =
1
p
|G|
X
g∈G
f(g)χ∗
k(g).
(18)
The inverse Fourier transform, implementing the reverse
map, computes the function
f(g) =
1
p
|G|
X
k∈ˆ
G
χk(g) ˆf(k).
(19)
Again,
the normalisation of forward and reverse
Fourier transform, and which one carries the conju-
gate of the character, is a convention, and sometimes
χk(g−1) = χ∗
k(g) is used.
The Fourier transform over a discrete, locally com-
pact non-Abelian group looks slightly different from the
Abelian Fourier transform.
Instead of the characters
of the group, they invoke objects called the irreducible
representations or irreps.
A representation is a map
R : G →GL(V ) from group elements to linear trans-
forms on a vector space V . There are many representa-
tions for a given group, each referring to a different vector
space. A subspace W ⊆V is called invariant if for every
group element g ∈G and every vector w ∈W, the result
R(g)w is still inside W. The representation is said to be
irreducible if the only invariant subspaces are the trivial
zero space {0} and the entire space V itself.
With this, we can define the most general version of
the group Fourier transform as follows:
Definition 2. Fourier transform over non-Abelian
groups Let G be a discrete non-Abelian group and R
the set of its (matrix-valued) inequivalent irreducible rep-
resentations.
The Fourier transform maps a function
f : G →C to the matrix-valued Fourier coefficients
ˆf(σ) =
1
p
|G|
X
g∈G
f(g)σ(g)†,
(20)
with σ ∈R. The inverse Fourier transform is given by
f(g) =
1
p
|G|
X
σ∈R
dσtr{ ˆf(σ)σ(g)},
(21)
with dσ the dimension of the irrep σ.
In the non-Abelian case, the Fourier coefficients are
matrices of varying sizes (and hence basis dependent,
which can complicate their interpretation). Note that the
Abelian case is a special case of Definition 2, as the ir-
reps of an Abelian group are one-dimensional, and hence
equal to their traces, i.e., the characters.
C.
Convolution
Given the prominent role of the convolution theorem
[
f ⋆g(σ) = ˆf(σ)ˆg(σ),
(22)
it is useful to also define the group-theoretic generalisa-
tion of convolution:
(f ⋆g)(g) =
X
g′∈G
f(g(g′)−1)g(g′).
(23)
For Abelian groups, where the group operation is usually
denoted by a +, while adding an inverse element becomes
a −, this becomes the more familiar
(f ∗g)(x) =
X
y∈R
f(x −y)g(y).
(24)
Note that in machine learning, convolution is often con-
flated with the more common cross-correlation, which
replaces the minus sign with a plus.
D.
Symmetry of the Fourier basis
The inverse Fourier transform can be understood
as
a
decomposition
of
a
function
over
G.
Ac-
cording to the Peter-Weyl theorem, the irrep entries
{σij}σ∈R,ij∈{1,...,dσ} form a complete orthogonal basis of
L2(G), the space of square integrable functions on the
group. But what is so special about the Fourier basis?
A defining feature of the Fourier basis is that the sub-
spaces Lσ ⊆L2(G) spanned by the set of all irrep entries
{σij(g)} for a given σ are invariant under the group ac-
tion. This follows from the definition of a representation:
σ(gg′) = σ(g)σ(g′),
(25)
which means that a translation by g′ does not cause the
function to leave the invariant subspace
Lσ = span{σ11(g), σ12(g), . . . , σdσ,dσ(g)}.
(26)
For Abelian groups (using additive notation below),
where we index the dual group by k ∈ˆG, the irreps
are one-dimensional. This means the invariant subspaces
Lk = span{χk(g)} are each spanned by a single character
that fulfills
χk(g + g′) = χk(g)χk(g′),
(27)
The significance of this invariance property is discussed
at length in the work of Diaconis [23]. For example, if
the symmetric group acts by permuting the features of a
data vector, this invariance means that the Fourier power
spectrum (the energy captured within each invariant sub-
space) does not change if we permute the order of the
features, which is often an arbitrary labeling decision.
This is intimately related to the smoothness inherent in
the Fourier spectrum: it informs us how the function
transforms if we shift it in direct space. In this sense,
the Fourier basis can capture important structure in the
data under “shifts”, which helps quantify its simplicity
for the design of machine learning models—a claim that
we will support with more evidence in the next section.
10
FIG. 5. Illustration of the relation between a group and a
homogeneous space, which are spaces where every point can
be reached by acting with a group element. Group elements
that map to the same point live in cosets of the stabiliser
subgroup (whose elements map x0 to itself). We can associate
the homogeneous space with the quotient space G/H.
E.
Fourier transforms on homogeneous spaces
While we focus on spectral methods for functions on
groups in this paper, there is an important generalisation
to functions on the homogeneous space X that a group G
acts on. (We will denote a group action as ▷: G × X →
X with g ▷x = x′.) This opens up the realm of spectral
analysis to many more data types, which is why we will
briefly list the relevant definitions here.
Technically, a homogeneous space X is a space where
the group G acts transitively (see Figure 5). This means
one can get from any point x ∈X to any other point y ∈
X using a group operation, g ▷x = y. Let us denote as
H the stabilizer subgroup of an arbitrary reference point
x0 ∈X,
H = {h ∈G|h · x0 = x0}.
(28)
The cosets gH = {gh|h ∈H} of the stabiliser subgroup
are sets of group elements whose action maps x0 onto the
same point x ∈X. This means that each point in X can
be associated with a coset of H in G. This allows us to
associate X with the quotient space, X ∼= G/H.
To spectrally analyze a function f : X →C, we can
therefore interpret it as a function f : G/H →C and then
“lift” it to G by making it constant on all group elements
in the same coset (i.e, the blue regions in Figure 5). We
define the lifted function f ↑: G →C by
f ↑(g) = f(g ▷x0).
(29)
Mathematically, this symmetry means that f ↑is right-
invariant under H:
f ↑(gh) = f(gh ▷x0) = f(g ▷x0) = f ↑(g)
∀h ∈H.
(30)
We can now apply the standard Fourier Transform to
f ↑:
ˆf ↑(ρ) =
X
g∈G
f ↑(g)ρ(g)†.
(31)
The technique of lifting has enabled the use of group
Fourier transforms to rigorously identify convolutional
layers with group-equivariant transformations, which
gave rise to generalisations of convolutional neural net-
works [30] in machine learning research.
It is also re-
lated to one of the first formulations of hidden subgroup
problems, which Kitaev phrased as an Abelian stabiliser
problem in 1995 [50]. In the following we will continue to
focus on Fourier transforms of functions on groups rather
than homogeneous spaces, but acknowledge the potential
that lies in this simple extension of spectral analysis.
IV.
CRUCIAL FOR MACHINE LEARNING
Smoothness is desirable in machine learning because it
leads to robust models that generalise well [22], and has
motivated many methods [18–21] that aim to bias models
towards smoothness. Yet, these techniques are scattered
and act indirectly on the model spectra, suggesting the
need for a broader paradigm for directly imposing sim-
plicity biases. Thus, before discussing quantum machine
learning algorithms, we have to address the elephant in
the room: Why should Fourier space be a prime place
to design the learning properties of a machine learning
model? The argument of this paper, which we present
in more detail here, is that machine learning fundamen-
tally needs to impose biases towards “simple models”,
and that the Fourier spectrum captures what is meant
by “simple”—for “conventional” data types as well as
for more specific, group-structured data such as permu-
tations.
To that end, we will first review the role of simplicity
and regularisation in learning theory. We will then take
a closer look at the notion of simplicity captured by the
low-order part of the Fourier spectrum for three example
groups, which showcases the diversity in which “simple”
can be interpreted. Lastly, we will highlight that spectral
methods are already quite prominent in machine learning
even if they are hardly ever explicitly mentioned in text-
books: they are implicitly used in methods that involve
(stationary) kernels, such as convolutional neural nets,
support vector machines, the maximum mean discrep-
ancy to train Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs),
and the Neural Tangent Kernel that became a prime
framework to investigate the working principle of of deep
learning.
A.
Why a simplicity bias is crucial for machine
learning
The foundations of learning theory [51, 52] cast ma-
chine learning as the problem of balancing expressivity
and simplicity in models built from data. This is made
particularly concrete in the framework of statistical learn-
ing theory developed by Vapnik and Chervonenkis [53],
which quantifies the generalisation power of a supervised
11
model through the principle of empirical risk minimiza-
tion. In this framework, the goal of machine learning is
to learn some function f from a set of possible functions
H that minimizes the expected risk
R(f) =
Z
X
p(x, y)L(f(x), y) dxdy,
(32)
which represents the model’s performance on unseen data
drawn from a ground truth distribution p(x, y) with re-
spect to some loss metric L. Practically, R(f) is exactly
what the test error is supposed to measure. Since p is
unknown, machine learning practitioners try to minimise
the expected risk by minimizing the empirical risk
ˆRM(f) = 1
M
X
x∈data
L(f(x), y),
(33)
the average error on a training set of size M.
Impor-
tantly for us, learning theory typically upper bounds the
expected risk by the empirical risk, plus a term C(H)
that accounts for the capacity of the model [54, 55],
R(f) ≤ˆRM(f) + C(H).
(34)
To get a small expected risk (or test error), one has to
decrease both terms on the right hand side. However,
these terms are at odds with each other. This is some-
times captured in the “bias-variance-tradeoff”, a term
that refers to the high variance of models that have a
low training error (as they overfit the particular data,
and produce very different predictions when trained on
different training data sets), and a high bias of those that
are simple (as they cannot learn the intricacies of the pat-
tern). Learning, as a conclusion, is the art of balancing
the model capacity with its flexibility.
The advent of deep learning has brought some more
nuance into this picture. In the past, the capacity term
was chosen to capture the expressivity of the model’s
function class, such as the VC-dimension [53] that mea-
sures how flexible the decision boundary of the best func-
tion in the model class is, or the Rademacher complex-
ity [56] that measures the average capacity of a model
class to classify randomly assigned labels. When deep
learning showed increasing evidence of empirical suc-
cess, one of the biggest “mysteries” was why large neu-
ral networks—a model class that has an arbitrarily large
term C(f) under these measures, as it can learn even
unstructured labels [57] — generalises so well. The res-
olution was found in the interplay of large models, big
data and the optimisation algorithm (i.e., [58–61]): some-
how, when these come together, the models that are ef-
fectively found in training are simple, even though train-
ing could in principle find much more complex models
that do not generalise.
In other words, deep learning
has a hidden, or “implicit” regularisation bias. This bias
seems to—somewhat paradoxically—fundamentally rely
on scale: the lottery ticket hypothesis [62] suggests that
while trained neural networks are rather compressible
(i.e., “simple”), they cannot be found using smaller archi-
tectures that are tailor-made to the solution. Altogether,
the insights from deep learning were well summarised by
Wilson’s soft simplicity bias:
“rather than restricting the hypothesis space
to avoid overfitting, [good models] embrace a
flexible hypothesis space, with a soft prefer-
ence for simpler solutions that are consistent
with the data”. [17]
B.
How a Fourier spectrum defines simplicity
If we understand machine learning as the problem to
find expressive, scalable model classes that have a sim-
plicity bias, a major component of designing good mod-
els is to engineer the simplicity bias. For deep learning,
this happened somewhat accidentally, and relies on heavy
computational resources.
An important open question
is hence how to engineer “soft simplicity biases” more
consciously, and hopefully without the immense energy
requirements of large neural networks.
We will now explore in more depth why the Fourier
spectrum provides a useful mathematical framework to
define—and subsequently exploit—notions of smooth-
ness.
This connection is relatively straightforward for
the standard Fourier transform on (R, +), where the co-
efficients capture smoothness, and on ZN
2 , where they
capture correlations and interaction effects. Building on
this, we will present an intuition for the Fourier spectrum
of the non-Abelian symmetric group Sn, which captures
significantly more complex correlation patterns.
Before proceeding, we emphasize that our notion of
smoothness in both the Abelian and non-Abelian cases
depends on some assumptions. While we may always de-
fine smoothness from first principles in terms of a partic-
ular set of generators, we generally rely on empirical data
and prior beliefs in order to choose a natural set of gen-
erators that best describes our observations in terms of
smooth functions. In this way, the treatment considered
here may be generalised to a large class of group-theoretic
settings.
1.
Continuous features
The standard continuous Fourier transform, which we
mentioned in the introduction, transforms functions on
the group R (or more precisely, (R, +)), with characters
exp (2πixk). Its multidimensional version maps functions
on products of this group, RN. The Fourier coefficients
of a function over RN are related to its smoothness.
The most obvious connection between the Fourier spec-
trum and smoothness of a bounded function on RN is
given by the canonical definition of smooth functions
as infinitely differentiable.
One can show that such
functions have a super-polynomial asymptotic decay in
12
FIG. 6. Fourier basis functions χk(x) for the cyclic group Zd
with imaginary part in blue and real part in red.
Fourier space, or
| ˆf(ω)| = O
 |ω|−m
as |ω| →∞.
(35)
Using the formula for partial integration, and assuming
that f decays at ±∞, one can write a Fourier coefficient
ˆf(k) as the Fourier coefficient of the derivative of f,
ˆf(k) =
Z
dxf(x)e−2πikx
(36)
=
1
(2πik)m
Z
dx (∂m
x f(x)) e−2πikx
(37)
=
1
(2πik)m \
∂m
x f(x).
(38)
Bounding | \
∂m
x f(x)| by the finite L1 norm of the input
function here one sees that
| ˆf(k)| ≤c/km
(39)
for some constant c, which is a spectral decay with the
power of m. If m goes to infinity, the asymptotic decay
has to be faster than any polynomial, and hence “super-
polynomial”. This confirms the intuition we have from
signal processing, namely that smooth functions have to
be constructed from slowly oscillating basis functions:
their Fourier coefficients are concentrated in the lower-
order part of the spectrum.
We want to briefly note that some encoding strate-
gies in quantum machine learning represent data as com-
putational basis states. In these cases we cannot work
with RN, but we can limit the data to a continuous
interval in each dimension, which we chop into d bins.
This allows us to work with a finite-precision approxima-
tion of RN expressed by products of the cyclic group,
ZN
d
= Zd × · · · × Zd.
Figure 6 shows that the real
and imaginary part of its characters exp (2πi xk
d ) are in-
deed “coarse-grained” sine and cosine functions. A sim-
ilar proof to above can be used to link the “modulus of
FIG. 7. Fourier basis functions χk(x) for the boolean group
Zn
2 with imaginary part in blue and real part in red.
smoothness” of a function over this Abelian group to a
decay in Fourier space.
2.
Binary features
In Section II we saw the Walsh transform that acts
on functions on a product of cyclic groups with two ele-
ments, Z2 ×· · ·×Z2 = Zn
2. This group can be thought of
as the set of bitstrings x ∈{0, 1}n with addition modulo
2, and gives rise to boolean cube arithmetic. We also saw
that the Fourier coefficients of a probability distribution
over the group Zn
2 can be interpreted as expected parities
of subsets of bits: The 1s in the frequency k ∈{0, 1}n de-
fine which bits are selected, and the Hamming weight of
k defines the order of the frequency. The parity functions
in Eq. 4 are nothing but the characters eiπx·k = (−1)x·k
(where x · k is the bitwise inner product modulo 2), and
the k are elements from the dual group.
The Fourier
coefficients are then written as
ˆf(k) =
1
√
2n f(x)eiπx·k.
(40)
We will now show why the Fourier coefficients of a
probability distribution over Zn
2 also have other statis-
tical interpretations, namely as moments when f is a
probability distribution, and interaction effects if it is a
response function (as known in the literature on experi-
mental designs [63]). Together these insights show that
the lower-order characters of Zn
2, and hence low-order
frequencies of a model, have rich interpretations as the
statistically simple part of a model.
Moments. Remember that a moment of a probability
13
distribution p(x) is defined as3
E[xk] =
X
x
p(x)xk.
(41)
For multiple binary random variables x1, ..., xn, a mixed
moment of order k = k1 + · · · + kn is given as
E[xk1
1 . . . xkn
n ] =
X
x1,...,xn
p(x1, ..., xn)xk1
1 . . . xkn
n .
(42)
For binary random variables, the k1, ..., kn have to be in
{0, 1} as x2
i = x0
i , x3
i = x1
i , etc. The relation between mo-
ments and Fourier coefficients is exposed if, for the mo-
ment, we move to a group that is perfectly isomorphic to
Z2, namely the second-order cyclic group ({−1, 1}, ×) of
a “spin variable” under multiplication. With this change,
i.e., if we define our model distribution on ¯x ∈{−1, 1}n
instead of x ∈{0, 1}n, the Fourier coefficients of p(¯x) are
precisely its moments. This can be seen since
(−1)kx =
Y
i|ki=1
(1 −2xi) =
Y
i|ki=1
¯xi
(43)
where xi, ki is the i’th bit of x, k. As the shape of the
function does not change when moving from one group
to its isomorphic equivalent, we can intuitively interpret
Fourier coefficients of Zn
2 as moments.
Consequently,
constructing models with a decaying Fourier spectrum
defines a model class that captures only low-order mo-
ments. It is important to note that this link is a special
property of Zn
2.
More generally, the Fourier spectrum
can be defined as the characteristic function of a proba-
bility distribution, and the moments can be “generated”
by taking partial derivatives of that function. However,
we will see below that also for the symmetric group, low-
order Fourier coefficients capture some kind of low-order
correlation.
Interaction effects. It turns out that a field of statistics
called “experimental design” [63] offers an alternative,
very intuitive interpretation for the Fourier coefficients
of a boolean function f(x), x ∈{0, 1}n as so-called inter-
action effects, which capture how much a change in one
variable affects the influence that other variables have on
f. We will illustrate this with a small example.
Imagine that bistrings x signify combinations of drugs,
modeled by features x1, ..., xn that can either be admin-
istered (xi = 1) or not (xi = 0) for i = 1, ..., N. For
now, consider every possible combination x ∈{0, 1}n of
N drugs was tested in a large trial, and the response
f(x), such as a recovery rate of patients, was measured.4
3 For ease of notation, we will not use different symbols for a ran-
dom variable X and its realisation x as standard in the statistics
literature.
4 In so-called fractional factorial designs statisticians look at trials
that did not include all x treatment combinations, which is much
closer in spirit to our ultimate goal to work with finite data.
A crucially important question is how the first drug x1
influences f(x), but independent of whether or not we
administered drug x2. We can do this by measuring the
difference between the response for x1 = 1 and x1 = 0,
averaged over all possible values of a fixed x2:
L(x1) =
 f(10) −f(00)

+
 f(11) −f(01)

.
(44)
The same is true for the influence of x2 on f:
L(x2) =
 f(01) −f(00)

+
 f(11) −f(10)

.
(45)
The above can be summarised by introducing the condi-
tional effect
L(x1|x2 = a) =
 f(1a) −f(0a)

,
(46)
and writing
L(x1) = L(x1|x2 = 0) + L(x1|x2 = 1).
(47)
Finally, we can ask how the drugs interact, for instance
how the change in response function f when changing
x1 differs when we change x2.
(This is in fact a sec-
ond derivative, it is the change of the change.) The in-
teraction can be defined by taking the difference of the
conditional effects above:
L(x1x2) = L(x1|x2 = 1) −L(x1|x2 = 0).
(48)
Clearly, the value L(x1) corresponds to the Zn
2 Fourier
coefficient
ˆf(k = 10) of f, while L(x2) corresponds
to ˆf(k = 01) and L(x1x2) corresponds to ˆf(k = 11).
This generalises to higher-order interactions: the effect
L(xi1, ..., xim) = L({xil}m
l=1) that the interaction of a
subset of drugs xi1, ..., xim has on f is given by the Fourier
coefficient f(k), where k has ones in positions i1, ..., im
and zeros otherwise. Overall, there seems to be a deep
connection between groups, spectral analysis and exper-
imental design [64], which gives the Fourier spectrum of
a model a tangible interpretation.
3.
Permutations
To venture into the realm of non-Abelian groups, we
want to summarise the intuition that Persi Diaconis built
for the notion of simplicity contained in the Fourier spec-
trum of functions over the symmetric group Sn [23] (see
also [65] for a gentle introduction). Loosely speaking, the
Fourier coefficients are related to expected patterns such
as “objects ADE are in positions 2, 4, 5, while objects BC
are in positions 1, 3,” with more complex patterns corre-
sponding to higher-order coefficients.
The symmetric group consists of permutations over
n objects, which are maps π from a set of n elements
to itself.
For example, for the set of n = 4 elements
{1, 2, 3, 4}, a possible permutation is the map
π(1) = 2,
(49)
π(2) = 4,
(50)
π(3) = 1,
(51)
π(4) = 3.
(52)
14
The map π can also be written as the tuple (2, 4, 1, 3), in
one-line notation, which is interpreted relative to the base
order (1, 2, 3, 4). Permutations are combined by chaining
these maps. The symmetric group is a fundamental con-
struction in representation theory.
The significance of
this group in machine learning is twofold. First, numer-
ous datasets can naturally be expressed as permutations,
most notably as rankings in information retrieval (search
engines), preference ordering (voting, product choices) or
object tracking (computer vision and identity manage-
ment). Second, as mentioned previously, permutations
can also act on the constituents of a data point, as in the
above example on feature permutation.
Without going into the vast details of the represen-
tation theory of Sn, we note that the irreducible repre-
sentations of the symmetric group are labeled by inte-
ger partitions of n, defined as tuples of positive integers
(λ1, λ2, . . . , λd) such that Pd
i λi = n and λ1 ≥λ2 ≥· · · ≥
λd. A natural partial order for the irreps—or the fre-
quencies—is established by comparing the partial sums
Pi
l=1 λl of two such partitions: a frequency is of higher
order (dominates) if, for all possible i, this sum is greater
than or equal to the corresponding sum of the other par-
tition (see, for example, [66] Def. 29). This is formally
known as the dominance order.
The entries of the matrix-valued Fourier coefficients of
a function f(π) over Sn, are projections of f onto the
normalized matrix elements σ(π)λ,ij of the irreducible
representations, which by Peter-Weyl theorem form an
orthogonal basis for the space of all scalar functions over
the group, L2(Sn),
ˆf(λ)i,j =
X
π
f(π)σ(π)λ,ij.
(53)
Note that we briefly switch to addressing an irrep by an
index λ to make the frequencies notationally more ex-
plicit. The elements σ(π)λ,ij form a basis for the invari-
ant subspace (modules) Vλ corresponding to the irreps
of Sn. Unfortunately, it is quite difficult to make intu-
itive sense of how such Fourier coefficients relate to the
complexity of f(π), or, in the case of probabilistic models
p(π), to low- or high-order correlations.
Diaconis’ insight was that we can interpret the Fourier
spectrum by looking instead at projections of f(π) onto
the basis vectors et of some other non-orthogonal sub-
spaces Mλ that we call the “marginal subspaces”. These
subspaces are indexed by the same integer partitions as
the irreps of Sn, and are, technically called Young per-
mutation modules. The invariant subspaces Vλ are the
block-diagonalisation of these permutation modules. The
crux is that the basis functions of Mλ are simply indica-
tor functions over specific permutation patterns, defined
by tabloids (specific mappings of subsets). For example,
the marginal probability of a distribution p(π) evaluat-
ing the specific pattern S →T, where
{2}→{4}
{1,3,4}→{1,2,3}, is
given by the projection onto the corresponding indicator
FIG. 8.
Examples for basis functions
ˆm(λ)i,j
of the
“marginal” subspaces, which are indicator functions that are
1 for certain permutation patterns.
Shown are basis func-
tions from the three marginal subspaces corresponding to fre-
quencies indexed by the integer partitions (3, 1), (2, 2) and
(2, 1, 1). It is visible that the highest order (bottom) has sup-
port over fewer permutations, than the lowest order (top).
The marginal subspaces lend interpretation to Fourier coeffi-
cients, which define different subspaces that are “pure” ver-
sions of those spanned by the marginal basis.
function:
P
{2}→{4}
{1,3,4}→{1,2,3}
=
X
π
p(π)I[(·, ·, ·, 2)]
(54)
where the indicator function inside the sum is 1 on all
permutations where item 2 is moved to position 4, while
1, 3, 4 are permuted into position 1, 2, 3 (see Figure 8).
Projections onto these basis functions can be interpreted
as how much weight a function has with regard to this
specific structural pattern (see Figure 8). With this, it
becomes meaningful to associate “lower-order” subspaces
with patterns that involve only a few elements.
Formally, the relationship between these statistically
easy-to-interpret marginal subspaces Mλ and the invari-
ant subspaces Vµ relevant in spectral analysis (Specht
modules) is given by their decomposition via Kostka
numbers Kµν:
Mλ ∼=
M
µ⊵λ
KµλVµ,
(55)
where ⊵denotes the dominance order of the irreps. Intu-
itively, this means that Mλ is composed of the invariant
subspace Vλ along with all higher-order invariant sub-
spaces. We can therefore interpret Vλ as the part of Mλ
that gets added when we move from a lower-order rep-
resentation to λ.
Consequently, the Fourier subspaces
15
Vλ are the “pure” λ-th order versions of the marginal
subspaces Mλ. This allows us to understand the Fourier
spectrum of the symmetric group as the “pure” part of
statistical averages over certain permutation patterns.
While the precise theory behind this notion is rather
technical, there are some surprisingly tangible applica-
tions of this intuition for identity management [66], card
games [23], the analysis of election data [67], cliques in
the decision making of the supreme court [68], as well
as for experimental designs [64]. We will review a recent
paper co-authored by some of us in Section VI B that
shows how quantum computers could, in principle, help
to unlock some of these methods by moving efficiently
between the Fourier and direct space of functions over
the symmetric group [69].
C.
Fourier methods in machine learning
The machine learning literature features little explicit
mention of Fourier methods besides a few exceptions such
as: Random Fourier Features [70], the use of the Fast
Fourier Transform to speed up certain transformer lay-
ers [71], or specialized architectures for domains such as
time-series data [72] or partial differential equations [73].
Kernels and convolution, on the other hand, are ubiqui-
tous concepts that have warranted their own textbooks.
Their utilization range from neural tangent kernels ex-
plaining the mechanism of deep learning [59] and gen-
eralised convolution in geometric deep learning [29], to
traditional kernel methods like support vector machines
and Gaussian processes [25, 26, 74].
Convolution and
kernels, however, are deeply related to spectral meth-
ods, a connection we will illustrate in the following. We
will use the general language of locally compact Abelian
groups, with g ∈G as the elements in direct space and
k ∈ˆG as the frequencies, but this can be readily trans-
lated to the more familiar case in machine learning of
G = (RN, +), and sometimes also to locally compact
non-Abelian groups.
1.
Stationary kernels are filters in Fourier space
First, let us define what a kernel is.
Definition 3. Let G be a locally compact group. A kernel
is a symmetric, positive definite function κ : G×G →C.
If a kernel only depends on the relative value gg′, it is
known as a stationary kernel.
Definition 4. A left stationary kernel is a kernel that is
invariant with respect to the left group action, i.e.,
κ(hg, hg′) = κ(g, g′) ∀g, g′, h ∈G,
(56)
with an equivalent definition of right stationary kernels.
Note that a stationary kernel can be written as a func-
tion of only one element,
κ(g, g′) = ϕ(gg′−1).
(57)
Most of the widely used kernels are stationary, such as
the Gaussian or Laplacian kernel.
The crucial property of stationary kernels is that con-
volving some function h(x) with such a kernel multiplies
each Fourier coefficient ˆh(k) of h with the kernel’s Fourier
coefficient ˆϕ(k):
(h ∗ϕ)(g) =
X
g′∈G
h(g)ϕ(gg′−1) = F−1{ˆh(k)ˆϕ(k)}. (58)
The convolution hence implements a spectral filter, and
the Fourier spectrum of the stationary kernel controls the
properties of the resulting function h ∗κ.5
Many machine learning models rely on convolution, al-
though the meaning of the abstract function h(x) varies
widely between different examples. For example, Support
Vector Machines [26] can be shown to use the model class
of linear combinations of kernels
f(x) =
X
x′∈X
κ(x, x′)a(x′),
(59)
which can be understood as the convolution of the kernel
with some weight function a(x) (which is only non-zero
on the “support vectors”).
The Maximum Mean Discrepancy [27] is a kernel-based
distance measure for two probability distributions p(g)
and q(g) used for generative learning and can be written
as
MMD2(p, q) =
X
g,g′
∆(g′)∆(g)κ(g, g′),
(60)
with ∆(g) = p(g) −q(g).
Using Plancherel’s theo-
rem, this expression can be shown to translate into
P
k |ˆp(k) −ˆq(k)|2 ˆϕ(k), which means that the (squared)
MMD measures the distance between the Fourier coef-
ficients ˆp(k), ˆq(k) of the distributions, weighted by the
Fourier coefficients of the kernel.
Convolutional neural networks apply a convolution on
a (tractable) function I(x, y) that can be interpreted as
a pixel value for each coordinate x, y ∈[0, . . . , d] of a
d×d-dimensional image, or of a layer after processing an
image6,
I′(x, y) =
X
s,t
I(s, t)κ(x −s, y −t).
(61)
5 Note that another way of stating this is that the eigenfunctions
of the integral operator for stationary kernels over the uniform
measure applied to some function f are the Fourier basis func-
tions, and the eigenvalues are f’s Fourier coefficients.
6 Note that in practice, this equation gets implemented as the
cross-correlation P
s,t I(s + x, t + y)κ(x, y).
16
Geometric deep learning [29] essentially generalises this
to other domains such as graphs. It can be understood
as designing spectral filters for the inputs (understood as
functions over some group), rather than for a function
over group-structured inputs—a feat that is much more
computationally tractable. While this is not the focus of
this paper, geometric deep learning provides a lot of ad-
jacent evidence that group spectral properties are useful
to learn from data.
Note in all of the above, a common choice of a kernel
for G = RN is the stationary Gaussian or radial basis
kernel:
κ(x, x′) = exp

−∥x −x′∥2
2σ2

.
(62)
A Gaussian function has a special Fourier spectrum,
which is also a Gaussian, and hence has support over all
inputs, but a strong decay that suppresses higher-order
coefficients. This imposes a widely useful (albeit “hard”,
or unlearnable [74]) regularisation on the model class,
which biases them towards smooth, or simple models.
Unsurprisingly, machine learning research has seen
many attempts at learning the kernel, which for sta-
tionary kernels learns a bias in Fourier space. The first
attempts were to combine multiple static kernels, and
learning the weights that organise the influence of each
of these distance measures [75]. Notably, Wilson et al.
[74] propose to use a kernel whose Fourier spectrum is a
normalised mixture of a finite number of Gaussian distri-
butions with trainable means and deviations, and thereby
designs the spectral bias directly. After deep learning be-
came popular, kernel learning moved to the idea of using
deep neural networks to extract the feature vectors fed
into a kernel method [76, 77]. The quadratic dependence
on the data was typically circumvented with sampling
methods [78]. While still in use for domains that rely on
the uncertainty quantification that kernel methods pro-
vide, learning the parameters of the kernel method to-
gether with the parameters of the neural network turned
out to be difficult and issues such as “feature collapse”
and overfitting are frequently observed [79, 80].
2.
The spectral bias of deep learning
The spectral bias describes the tendency of deep neural
networks to learn low-frequency components of a target
function significantly faster than high-frequency compo-
nents. The phenomenon was first observed concurrently
by [32] and [33] (who used the term “F-Principle”). Ra-
haman et al. [32] use an analytic derivation that allowed
the efficient estimation of Fourier coefficients for neural
networks with ReLU activations, and show empirically
that the Fourier coefficients of the model match those of
the ground truth from low to high order during training.
At the same time, they find that lower-order coefficients
are more robust against perturbing the parameters of the
neural network, and that adding high-frequency noise to
data does not disturb the net’s performance. Xu et al.
[33] on the other hand compare averages of the low and
high-order parts of the training error’s Fourier spectrum,
with similar conclusions. The computational method to
make statements about the Fourier transform of high-
dimensional functions was later refined by Kiessling and
Thor [81], who use a sinc-kernel to extract the averages
by convolution—once more making Fourier space com-
putationally accessible with kernels.
But not only the empirical tools, also later theoreti-
cal explanation of the spectral bias involves kernels. A
range of studies [82, 83] have contributed evidence that
the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) [59]—a kernel that
famously describes the training dynamics of deep neu-
ral networks, and one of the major theoretical tools in
the analysis of deep learning—carries this spectral bias
for some neural network architectures. More precisely, it
has been shown that the k’th eigenvalue of the NTK, λk,
controls how fast a projection of the training error ϵ onto
the corresponding eigenfunction converges [84],
ϵk(t) = ϵk(0)e−ηλkt,
(63)
where η is the learning rate. Patterns associated with
large eigenvalues are therefore learned quickly, while pat-
terns associated with small eigenvalues are learned slowly.
It follows that if the NTK is stationary and the data
distribution uniform (for example, when the input data
is uniformly distributed over the unit sphere [82]), the
eigenfunctions of the NTK are the Fourier basis func-
tions, and the eigenvalues the network’s Fourier coeffi-
cients. This provides an analytical explanation for the
spectral bias for certain situations.
In summary, while spectral methods seem to lack
explicit prominence in mainstream machine learning
research, the widespread use of kernels and convolu-
tion shows that many established ML techniques fun-
damentally rely on manipulating—albeit implicitly—the
Fourier spectrum of a model or distance measure.
V.
NATURAL FOR QUANTUM COMPUTERS
An important—albeit, as we will discuss later in this
section, not the only—argument that quantum comput-
ers could be a natural hardware for spectral methods in
machine learning rests on the ability of quantum com-
puters to efficiently implement Fourier transforms on the
amplitudes of a quantum state. Given a quantum state
|ψ⟩, we can interpret the amplitudes ψ(x) = ⟨x|ψ⟩in
computational basis as a complex-valued function over
x. The Quantum Fourier Transform (QFT) prepares a
quantum state whose amplitudes are given by the dis-
crete Fourier transform of ψ(x),
X
x
ψ(x) |x⟩→
X
k
ˆψ(k) |k⟩.
(64)
But how is |x⟩associated with a group? And when are
efficient quantum Fourier transforms known to exist? In
17
this section we will put these questions onto more solid
footing, which requires understanding the Fourier trans-
form as a basis change in a vector space. We will also
give explicit formulas of how the Fourier coefficients of
amplitudes relate to the Fourier coefficients of standard
supervised and generative quantum models built from
these quantum states. Lastly, we will look at situations
where quantum models can design Fourier spectra with-
out making use of the QFT.
A.
Connection to quantum Hilbert spaces
We can represent discrete function f : G →C as a
vector v ∈C|G| of function values
f ↔


f(g1)
f(g2)
...
f(g|G|).


(65)
The Fourier transform can be understood as the matrix
that changes from the standard basis
eg1 =


1
0
...
0

, . . . , eg|G| =


0
0
...
1


(66)
to the Fourier basis of character-vectors











χk(g1)
χk(g2)
...
χk(g|G|)











k∈ˆ
G
(67)
in the Abelian case, and matrix elements of the irre-
ducible representations











σij(g1)
σij(g2)
...
σij(g|G|)











σ∈R,ij∈{1,...,dσ}
(68)
in the non-Abelian case.
To move to quantum states, we have to associate the
computational basis with the standard basis vectors
|g⟩↔eg.
(69)
This allows us to interpret the state in computational
basis as the vector representation of a function ψ(g) on
the group,
X
g∈G
ψ(g) |g⟩.
(70)
The QFT is then a unitary operator which changes into
the Fourier basis, and is given by
F =
1
p
|G|
X
g∈G
X
χk∈ˆ
G
χk(g)|k⟩⟨g|
(71)
for the Abelian case, and
F =
X
x∈G
X
σ∈R
s
dσ
|G|
dσ
X
i,j=1
σ(g)ij|σ, i, j⟩⟨g|,
(72)
for the non-Abelian case (see also [45]).
The view of the Fourier transform as a basis change
has a deeper root in representation theory that we want
to briefly allude to.
Technically, associating the com-
putational basis with the standard basis for each group
element means associating the Hilbert space with the
regular representation of the group. Remember that a
representation is a map R : G →GL(V ), which “rep-
resents” the group as a linear transformation on some
vector space. The vector space V of the regular represen-
tation is spanned by basis states {egi} (which means that
V has dimension |G|). The right regular representation is
then defined as the map with the property R(h)eg = ehg
with h, g ∈G (while the left regular representation fulfills
R(h)eg = egh). This allows us to formulate an alternative
definition of the group Fourier transform:
Definition 5. The Fourier transform is a basis change
F that block-diagonalises the (left and right) regular rep-
resentation of G.
In Section VI C we will see that if quantum states are
associated with other representations than the regular
one fixed by interpreting a computational basis state with
a group element, we can perform a spectral analysis that
is similar to Fourier analysis. However, the basis change
is given by other transforms (such as the quantum Schur
transform [85–87]).
B.
When do efficient QFTs exist?
An efficient QFT can be decomposed into O(poly(n))
elementary gates. While the most prominent version is
the QFT over the cyclic group Z2n, which facilitates
Shor’s factoring algorithm with a gate complexity of
O(n2), the QFT is known to be efficient for all finite
Abelian groups. This generalization is made possible by
the fundamental theorem of finitely generated Abelian
groups, which states that any finite Abelian group is iso-
morphic to a direct product of cyclic groups. Since the
QFT of a direct product group G × G′ can be imple-
mented as the tensor product of the individual transforms
(QFTG ⊗QFTG′), the ability to efficiently transform
cyclic factors implies efficiency for the entire Abelian
18
class7.
Beyond the Abelian case, efficient QFT algorithms
have been established for certain non-Abelian families,
such as the symmetric group Sn, metacyclic groups,
the wreath product of poly-sized group, and metabelian
groups [38, 89–91].
Many of these QFTs rely on the
mechanism behind Cooley-Tucker’s Fast Fourier Trans-
form (FFT), which uses a “subgroup tower” to decom-
pose a Fourier transform on a group into those over sub-
groups.
Quantum computers can elegantly parallelise
this divide-and-conquer strategy [38], turning the poly-
nomial speedup alluded to by the term “Fast” into an
exponential (and sometimes super-exponential) one. As
a result, an efficient QFT is known to exist for every
group that admits an FFT.8
C.
QFTs and generative quantum models
Quantum Fourier transforms allow us to transform the
amplitudes of quantum states. But how does this relate
to the spectrum of a machine learning model derived from
the state?
Let us explain this for the example of quantum circuit
Born machines [36], which prepare a (in general, train-
able) quantum state |ψθ⟩and define an implicit proba-
bilistic model [93] as the measurement probability in the
computational basis,
pθ(x) = |⟨x|ψθ⟩|2.
(73)
According to the discussion above, the bitstring x ∈
{0, 1}n is interpreted as a group element g ∈Zn
2.
For Abelian groups, the relation between the Fourier
coefficients of the model and those of the amplitudes is
given by a simple formula:
Theorem 1. Let p(x) = |⟨x|ψθ⟩|2 be the measurement
distribution of a (trainable) quantum state, with Fourier
transform ˆp(k). Let ˆψ(k) be the Fourier coefficients of
the amplitudes ψ(x) = ⟨x|ψθ⟩. Then
ˆp(k) =
1
√
2n
X
s
ˆψ(s) ˆψ∗(s + k)
(74)
Note that we did not specify the Abelian group of the
Fourier transform, as the following proof works whether
we, for example, interpret the bitstrings x ∈{0, 1}n
as elements from Zn
2 (i.e., as binary features) or as el-
ements from ZN
d (i.e., integer-valued, or coarse-grained
continuous-valued features).
Proof. The proof is straight forward; we express the am-
plitudes in the Born rule by their Fourier decomposi-
tion and use two well-known properties of characters,
7 See Section 6.2 in [88] on the problem of finding the isomorphic
cyclic group.
8 See the PennyLane tutorial [92] for an intuitive explanation.
χk(x)χs(x) = χk+s(x) and the character orthogonality
theorem P
x χk(x)χ∗
s(x) = |G|δs,k:
ˆp(k) =
1
√
2n
X
x
|ψ(x)|2χk(x)
(75)
= 1
2n
1
√
2n
X
x
X
s
ˆψ(s)χs(x)
X
t
ˆψ∗(t)χ∗
t (x)χk(x)
(76)
= 1
2n
1
√
2n
X
st
ˆψ(s) ˆψ∗(t)
X
x
χ∗
s−t(x)χk(x)
(77)
=
1
√
2n
X
s
ˆψ(s) ˆψ∗(s −k).
(78)
An analogous statement for non-Abelian groups can be
found in [69]. Note that for Zn
2 , s −k = s + k.
We want to briefly mention another example of how
QFTs could help with the design of quantum models.
One of the most important use cases for QFTs is to solve
hidden subgroup problems [45], of which Shor’s algorithm
is the most well-known. While hidden subgroup prob-
lems seem rather artificial for a discipline as applied as
machine learning, recently it was shown that it can be
used to find partitions of qubits into unentangled subsets
[46], an algorithm which can elegantly be translated into
heuristics that gives us access to the (un-)entanglement
structure of a quantum state [47].
If such a quantum
state represents a generative machine learning model,
quantum algorithms for hidden subgroup problems based
on the QFT could provide unique tools to query and ma-
nipulate the independence structure of variables repre-
sented by the qubits. Another avenue in this direction is
the exploration of learning hidden subgroups from data
[94] (rather than computing it from an oracle), although
it is yet unclear how this problem relates to real-world
applications.
D.
Spectral methods beyond the QFT
The situation of spectral biases looks very different for
“quantum neural networks” [10, 35]. Here the computa-
tional basis that the QFT acts on is not associated with
the data any more, which is in general continuous-valued.
Instead, the data is typically encoded into the state us-
ing gates eixiH that encode the elements of the vector
via an evolution of the Hermitian operator H. Note that
as eixiH = ei(xi+2π)H, the data domain is effectively the
group R/Z. The model function f(x) is defined as the
expectation of some observable O with respect to the
data-dependent state |ψx⟩:
f(x) = ⟨ψx|O|ψx⟩.
(79)
As a result, the quantum Fourier transform is not a
Fourier transform on the data space any more. However,
19
the quantum model still has special properties with re-
spect to the “classical” Fourier transform over R/Z, as we
will explain in Section VI A. This makes quantum neural
networks candidates to design spectral biases without ap-
plying a quantum Fourier transform, simply by the way
that data is encoded.
VI.
SPECTRAL METHODS IN QML
Following the above collection of arguments for why
spectral methods are crucial for machine learning and
natural for quantum computers, we want to conclude
by reviewing a few existing areas in quantum machine
learning research that already recognise the potential of
spectral methods. The material collected in the previous
sections suggests that these compile just the beginning
of a much deeper connection that is waiting to be uncov-
ered.
A.
The spectral bias of QNNs
Quantum Neural Networks—also referred to as Varia-
tional Quantum Circuits—are parametrised quantum cir-
cuits used as supervised machine learning models [10, 11].
A subset of circuit parameters is used to encode an input
x ∈RN, while the remaining parameters θ are trained
by gradient descent methods, typically using parameter-
shift rules [34, 35]. An expected observable, such as the
average measurement result for a designated qubit, is in-
terpreted as the value fθ(x) of the model.
A growing
body of literature argues that Quantum Neural Networks
have a spectral bias [39–42] which can be manipulated for
specific learning tasks [95]. This includes a “hard” spec-
tral bias stemming from the embedding of classical data
and a potential “soft” spectral bias that regularises the
underlying model class [39], as well as a possible spectral
bias with respect to the learning dynamics similar to the
one observed in classical neural networks [40].
The “hard” spectral bias goes back to Schuld et al. [39]
which showed that Quantum Neural Networks can be ex-
pressed by a truncated Fourier series. A feature x ∈R of
the input vector (as well as the trainable parameters) are
encoded via gates of the form eixH, where H is a Hermi-
tian operator that is often chosen as a single-qubit Pauli
operator, which makes the gate a X, Y , or Z rotation.
Assuming that H has integer-valued eigenvalues, we have
eixH = ei(x+2π)H, which means that the model fθ(x) is
2π-periodic. Alternatively, the data can be thought of as
taken from the N-dimensional unit circle, or the group
R/Z. The natural Fourier decomposition is therefore the
Fourier series
fθ(x) =
1
√
2π
X
k∈Ω
ˆfθ(k)e−2πix·k
(80)
where the elements of k can take any integer value
(k = −∞, . . . , ∞) and x · k is the standard inner prod-
uct of two vectors. It turns out [39] that the eigenvalues
{λ1, . . . , λd} of H put limitations on Ω, and therefore
bandlimit the Fourier spectrum: the spectrum only con-
tains frequencies
Ω= {k|Λi −Λj = k}.
(81)
composed of combinations of eigenvalues as
Λi = (λi1 + · · · + λid)
(82)
Λj = (λj1 + · · · + λjd) ,
(83)
where i = (i1, ..., id), j = (j1, ..., jd) and il, jl = 1, ...d. In
other words: typical Quantum Neural Network architec-
tures are a bandlimited function class.
Within the allowed frequency band, Quantum Neural
Networks can also have a soft spectral bias. Essentially,
this can be seen by considering the combinatorial expres-
sion linking the Fourier coefficients to parameters aj,k
that depend on the choice of gates and measurements in
the circuit,
ˆfθ(k) =
X
i,j|Λi−Λj=k
aj,k.
(84)
The smaller k, the more combinations of eigenvalues
Λi −Λj add up to k, and the more terms in the sum.
This has led to studies exploring how the embedding
gates’ eigenvalue spectrum shapes the Fourier spectrum
of Quantum Neural Networks [96], and to claims of a
spectral bias based on redundancy [41].
In addition, there is an ongoing debate on whether
quantum neural networks have a spectral bias in their
learning dynamics, similar to classical neural networks.
Lu et al. [40] provide a general framework of conditions
for which the high-order part of the training error is
guaranteed to be larger than the lower-order part dur-
ing gradient descent, and argue that these conditions are
fulfilled by both classical neural networks and quantum
neural networks, even if data encoding is not facilitated
by gates of the form eixiH. An opposing view is provided
by [42], whose analysis of the neural tangent kernel of
quantum neural networks does not show a frequency-wise
decoupling of the training error in Fourier space.
An interesting aspect of the spectral bias debate is
that a bandlimited or decaying Fourier spectrum can
make classical simulation of quantum neural networks
feasible, which can both boost and harm the claim that
they require quantum hardware to be implemented. On
the one hand, for Quantum Neural Networks to bene-
fit from quantum hardware (and justify investments into
this technology), they need to be difficult to classically
simulate. On the other hand, as first-generation quantum
computers will likely be small and slow, it is attractive
to outsource as much as possible to classical simulation.
For example, [97] shows how quantum neural networks
need to be trained on quantum computers due to the
exponential growth of trainable Fourier coefficients, but
could then be deployed by “classical surrogate models”
20
that implement the trained truncated Fourier series on
classical hardware. Li and Zhang [98] argue that a certain
type of bandlimited simulation, called Pauli Path Propa-
gation [99], can be used to warm-start training on quan-
tum computers (we will discuss below how the Pauli Path
Propagation algorithm can be understood to be working
in a generalized Fourier basis).
Ultimately, only empirical experiments will determine
whether the region of Fourier space that is classically
intractable—yet quantumly accessible—plays a critical
role in these models. However, we consider this highly
likely, given the established importance of learning inter-
mediate frequencies for generalizing beyond mere inter-
polation in deep learning.
B.
Probabilistic modeling over the symmetric
group
In Section IV B 3 we motivated that the Fourier spec-
trum of a fundamental, but non-trivial group, the sym-
metric group, contains important statistical information
for the design of machine learning models for permuta-
tion data. For probabilistic models, Fourier coefficients
correspond to expectations of the irreducible represen-
tations of the group, and low-order Fourier coefficients
reflect simple correlation patterns such as object i is in
position j, while higher-order coefficients capture high-
order correlations of the type objects i, j, k are in posi-
tions l, m, n while object r is in position q. This property
has been exploited by Risi Kondor [100] and Jonathan
Huang [66] to build probabilistic models over permuta-
tions, and subsequently been translated to a quantum
algorithm [69].
The basic idea in both classical and quantum propos-
als is to create a model in a recurrent, Markov-chain type
structure, where starting with a canonical assignment be-
tween objects and positions, we iterate over diffusion and
conditioning steps. Diffusion is a process that captures
the chance of swapping the positions of two elements (i.e.,
a transposition) as time goes by, and can be seen as a ran-
dom walk over the Cayley graph of permutations, whose
edges connect permutations that are only a transposition
apart. This process “smears out” the probabilities and
creates uncertainty about object-position assignments.
Conditioning, instead, adds information to the model in
the form of a Bayesian update.
Essentially, one mul-
tiplies the model with a likelihood function that reflects
information from making an observation such as item j is
in position i, after which permutations with this pattern
become more likely in the model. While this framework
is a little different from the standard training of a neu-
ral network, it is a machine learning method similar to
Kalman filtering, which is widely used in navigation and
control [101].
Importantly, the two steps of uncertainty generation
and elimination are elegantly interpreted from the per-
spective of harmonic analysis. Diffusion is a convolution
p(π)∗q, in other words an equivariant map [30], between
the present model and a “kernel” such as
q(π) =





p
π = e
(1 −p)/
 n
2

π is a transposition
0
otherwise.
(85)
According to the convolution theorem, the convolution
is a simple point-wise product in Fourier space. Further-
more, the above kernel is a class function, which means
according to Schur’s lemma that the Fourier coefficient
has the even simpler form of ˆqσ = cσI. This means that
implementing diffusion is particularly elegant in Fourier
space.
Conditioning or a Bayesian update, in turn, is
a product in direct space but a convolution in Fourier
space (which mixes frequencies to some extent).
The super-exponential n! growth of the symmetric
group, and consequently the scaling of the Fast Fourier
Transform, makes probabilistic modeling over permuta-
tions, including the strategy above, challenging. To cir-
cumvent this, work by Kondor [100] and Huang et al.
[66] proposed operating in a bandlimited Fourier space,
which entails retaining only the low-order Fourier coeffi-
cients. Such models can represent simple correlations in
the data, and solve specific inference tasks that, likewise,
only require these low-order Fourier coefficients. How-
ever, even with advanced implementations and severe
bandlimiting, these simple models can only realistically
deal with n < 30 items [100].
In Belis et al. [69] the
authors (including some of us) therefore set out to ask
whether quantum computers could lift these restrictions.
They show that, in principle, the Markov model after
t time steps can be implemented efficiently on a quan-
tum computer using amplitude encoding, and provide an
algorithm to prepare a state proportional to
X
π∈Sn
p(t)(π) |π⟩.
(86)
This approach requires that only a few conditioning
steps are involved, and that the observations have non-
negligible support in the current model at any given step.
While this encodes the probabilistic model into the am-
plitudes of the quantum state, a similar process could
prepare a model ˜p in “Born encoding”
X
π∈Sn
p
˜p(π) |π⟩.
(87)
The model state could be used to sample from the distri-
butions |p(π)|2 or ˜p(π) to generate new data. Additional
techniques can lead to algorithms that sample the most
probable permutations by preparing a state with ampli-
tudes proportional to |p(π)|m, or marginals thereof—a
task that is highly challenging classically.
While many non-trivial open questions remain, such
as the feasibility of implementation on realistic hard-
ware, or the performance of the model on real-world
21
data compared to methods not based on harmonic anal-
ysis, this study opens up the prospect that quantum
computers may be able to unlock machine learning with
permutation-structured data. Such data is surprisingly
common in rankings for recommendation systems and in-
formation management, or in identity management and
tracking tasks.
C.
Resource theories and Fourier analysis
Lately, a form of group spectral methods have been
suggested to study the resourcefulness of quantum states
[102] (see also the PennyLane demo [103]). Resource the-
ories in quantum information ask how “complex” a given
quantum state is with respect to a certain measure of
complexity, which often translates into how difficult they
are to prepare in the lab, or how difficult they are to
simulate on a classical computer. Examples of resources
are entanglement, Clifford stabilizerness and Gaussian-
ity. As it turns out, a very useful “resource fingerprint”
of a quantum state is a generalised version of its power
spectrum (i.e., the absolute square values of the Fourier
coefficients). “Generalised” here refers to the fact that
we invoke the mechanism of Fourier analysis described in
Section V A, but instead of a projection of a function onto
the orthogonal basis of all characters or irreps, we project
only onto a few of them. Technically speaking, this means
that we relax the condition that a quantum state is asso-
ciated with the regular representation, which means that
a computational basis state relates to each group element,
as introduced in Section V A. Instead, we can associate
the vector space of quantum states with any represen-
tation, which defines what we consider to be a resource.
Intuitively, this generalises the notion of “smoothness”
inherent in the Fourier spectrum to other resources, and
potentially opens up recipes for generalised regularisation
of quantum machine learning models.
The recipe to compute the group generalised power
spectrum (or “GFD Purities” [102]) goes as follows:
• Identify the set of “free states” under the resource,
such as the set of entanglement-free product states.
• Identify a unitary representation R : G →GL(V )
of some group G that maps free states to free states.
Here, V is the vector space that describes quantum
states. For example, if V = L(H) is the space of
density matrices ρ, a representation may be given
by the adjoint representation R : g →R(g)ρR(g)†
of unitary operators R(g) that do not entangle
qubits.
• Find the basis change that block-diagonalises the
representation to decompose it into irreps. These
reveal the invariant subspaces of V .
• Given a new state, applying the basis change will
reveal the GFD Purities.
Of course, if the representation is chosen as the regular
representation and V is the Hilbert space of Dirac vec-
tors, the Purities are simply the absolute squares of the
Fourier coefficients of a quantum state, and the block-
diagonalisation is the Quantum Fourier Transform. For
other representations, we might need other transforms
(such as the quantum Schur transform [87]), but the Pu-
rities have a very similar spectral interpretation.
When we take the resource to be entanglement, the
invariant subspaces that correspond to different Puri-
ties are spanned by “constant-order” Pauli basis vectors,
which are those that apply identities to a constant num-
ber of qubits. For example, for two qubits, the invariant
subspaces that the Purities project into are spanned by
{I × I}, {I × X, I × Y, I × Z}, {X × I, Y × I, Z × I}, and
{X × X, X × Y, . . . , Z × Z}. This shows how the invari-
ant subspaces refer to subsets of qubits (similar to the
frequencies of the Walsh transform).
Quantum states
with “bandlimited” GFD Purities are those that have
limited entanglement, as they only have non-zero pro-
jections into subspaces that have non-trivial support on
few qubits. Circuits that stay in these bandlimited sub-
spaces are exactly the ones that the popular technique
Pauli Path Propagation simulates [98, 99].
Again, the
Fourier spectrum, even if a much generalised notion of
it, uncovers “simplicity”.
We want to note in passing that there is an intriguing
relation between resource theories and quantum phase
spaces, which represent a quantum state as a function
f : G →C from a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space. It
can be shown that canonical choices of the phase space
implement a spectral filter: they emphasise the informa-
tion of the quantum state in some irreps and suppress
the information from others [104].
This opens up the
prospect of using quantum phase spaces as regularised
function spaces to learn about the properties of quantum
states from measurements.
VII.
OUTLOOK
In this article, we argued that spectral methods are
a compelling candidate to answer the question of why
quantum computers could help to design the next gen-
eration of machine learning methods, as first asked a
decade ago [105].
After some scrutiny, spectral meth-
ods appear rather central to learning: The Fourier spec-
trum of a model contains information on properties
such as smoothness and robustness, and is therefore the
prime target for past and present regularisation strate-
gies, which are at the heart of generalisation.
Fourier
methods, in particular their group-theoretic generalisa-
tions, are also the very foundation of quantum comput-
ing as they underlie quantum mechanics as a whole [106].
The Quantum Fourier Transform, in particular, is a pow-
erful subroutine to access—and hence manipulate—the
Fourier spectrum or other algebraic properties [46] of
quantum states that represent machine learning models.
22
Can quantum computers unlock more “direct” spectral
regularisation techniques? Will they enable the design of
desirable biases without reverting to the unsustainable
scales of heavily overparametrised neural networks? Are
they the solution to yet unsuccessful attempts of training
kernel methods?
We hope that this collection of material helps to stim-
ulate a new research direction in quantum machine learn-
ing that tries to find answers to these questions.
To
do so successfully requires us to fundamentally shift our
perspective: from what is a model class with provable
quantum speedups to how can we use the strengths of
a quantum computer to build good models? Moving to-
wards the latter requires stronger roots in machine learn-
ing research, because it demands a good understand-
ing for what makes a “good” model—in particular as
we do not currently have access to large-scale bench-
marking that allows for a purely empirical validation.
Luckily, recent years of machine learning research have
provided many answers to this question, which—perhaps
unsurprisingly—have led us back to the principles of tra-
ditional learning theory [17, 58, 107], rather than up-
rooting them [57]. What emerges is a recalibrated un-
derstanding of the interplay between flexibility and sim-
plicity: Good models have soft simplicity biases; they
can learn anything, but have a preference towards sim-
ple functions. At the same time, to handle modern ma-
chine learning tasks, good models have to be compu-
tationally extremely efficient on the available hardware
[108]. Neural networks often fulfill these properties, and
are by now not so much a distinct model class, but the
workhorse whenever a machine learning model requires a
parametrised function whose gradients are quick to com-
pute. However, neural networks come with an important
caveat: somewhat paradoxically, they achieve simplicity
through large architectures and big data inputs.
This
makes them not only resource intensive, but also unsuit-
able for small problems, where engineering features and
biases is still crucial. One way to innovate machine learn-
ing is therefore to take the powerful mechanisms of neural
networks and “reproduce” them at smaller scales. Spec-
tral methods may offer a domain-independent blueprint
for this, in particular if we take the structure of data more
seriously, as evident in geometric deep learning [29].
Showing that quantum computers could implement
soft simplicity biases while being computationally effi-
cient is no small task. Quantum computers offer a very
particular access to information via measurement. For
example, generative quantum models can fundamentally
not estimate likelihoods of the sampling distribution,
whereas classical generative models (besides GANs) can
be understood as a collection of ingenious, technical, and
non-obvious tricks to do exactly that [109].
Quantum
Fourier Transforms do not enable us to directly compute
the Fourier coefficients of a quantum state, we can only
manipulate them within the limits of quantum algorith-
mic tools, or sample from the spectrum. And, while a
fundamental building block for even fault-tolerant quan-
tum machine learning algorithms, training parametrised
circuits is by no means the silver bullet that neural net-
works represent: it is slow and expensive, and will likely
require tricks to “train classically, deploy quantum” [14].
The way towards performant spectral quantum ma-
chine learning models will be to understand and over-
come these challenges, not by copying what has worked in
classical learning, but by combining highly specific, the-
oretically well-motivated tools that are tailor-made for
quantum computers. Good quantum machine learning
models will also likely be dequantisable if the problems
are simple enough, as they possess a lot of structure—
which, we firmly believe, bypasses most of the current ar-
guments regarding barren plateaus [110], as those gener-
ally rely on Haar-random ensembles. However, even deep
learning models can, once trained, be replaced by much
simpler (compressed) architectures; still, generalisation
relies on the flexibility of large scales [17, 62].
In the
language of spectral biases: we expect that performance
strongly depends on what happens in the medium-order
region of the Fourier spectrum—in other words, at the
edge of classical simulatability. If quantum models are
performant, they should lead to great classical models
as well, which, once widely deployed, will eventually de-
mand quantum hardware to push performance even fur-
ther. We therefore argue that the current preoccupation
with dequantisation in quantum machine learning can be
an obstacle, rather than a compass, for true progress.
Finally, we want to remark that while we have fo-
cused on Fourier analysis, the Fourier basis is only one of
many representations that quantum computers can effi-
ciently manipulate. There are promising suggestions for
efficient quantum Schur [85–87], Chebyshev [111], Pal-
dus [112], wavelet [113], Laplace [114], and Hilbert [115]
transforms.
In this spirit, quantum computers can be
understood as physical samplers from high-dimensional
distributions, capable of moving seamlessly into complex
bases to extract features from data. It is therefore dif-
ficult to imagine that such machines will not open up
entirely new ways to learn.
[1] R. Babbush, R. King, S. Boixo, W. Huggins, T. Khat-
tar, G. H. Low, J. R. McClean, T. O’Brien, and N. C.
Rubin, The grand challenge of quantum applications
(2025), arXiv:2511.09124.
[2] M. Schuld and N. Killoran, Is quantum advantage the
right goal for quantum machine learning?, PRX Quan-
tum 3, 030101 (2022).
[3] M. Cerezo, G. Verdon, H.-Y. Huang, L. Cincio, and
P. J. Coles, Challenges and opportunities in quantum
machine learning, Nature computational science 2, 567
(2022).
[4] M. Schuld and F. Petruccione, Machine learning with
23
quantum computers, Vol. 676 (Springer, 2021).
[5] J. Biamonte, P. Wittek, N. Pancotti, P. Rebentrost,
N. Wiebe, and S. Lloyd, Quantum machine learning,
Nature 549, 195 (2017).
[6] P. Rebentrost, M. Mohseni, and S. Lloyd, Quantum sup-
port vector machine for big data classification, Physical
review letters 113, 130503 (2014).
[7] I. Kerenidis and A. Prakash, Quantum recommendation
systems (2016), arXiv:1603.08675.
[8] N. Wiebe, D. Braun, and S. Lloyd, Quantum algorithm
for data fitting, Physical review letters 109, 050505
(2012).
[9] S. Lloyd, M. Mohseni, and P. Rebentrost, Quantum
principal component analysis, Nature Physics 10, 631
(2014).
[10] E. Farhi and H. Neven, Classification with quan-
tum neural networks on near term processors (2018),
arXiv:1802.06002.
[11] M. Schuld, A. Bocharov, K. M. Svore, and N. Wiebe,
Circuit-centric quantum classifiers, Physical Review A
101, 032308 (2020).
[12] M. Cerezo, M. Larocca, D. Garc´ıa-Mart´ın, N. L. Diaz,
P. Braccia, E. Fontana, M. S. Rudolph, P. Bermejo,
A. Ijaz, S. Thanasilp, et al., Does provable absence
of barren plateaus imply classical simulability?, Nature
Communications 16, 7907 (2025).
[13] J. Bowles, S. Ahmed, and M. Schuld, Better than clas-
sical? the subtle art of benchmarking quantum machine
learning models (2024), arXiv:2403.07059.
[14] E. Recio-Armengol, S. Ahmed, and J. Bowles, Train
on classical, deploy on quantum:
scaling generative
quantum machine learning to a thousand qubits (2025),
arXiv:2503.02934.
[15] H.-Y. Huang, M. Broughton, N. Eassa, H. Neven,
R. Babbush, and J. R. McClean, Generative quantum
advantage for classical and quantum problems (2025),
arXiv:2509.09033.
[16] H.-Y. Huang,
M. Broughton,
J. Cotler,
S. Chen,
J. Li, M. Mohseni, H. Neven, R. Babbush, R. Kueng,
J. Preskill, et al., Quantum advantage in learning from
experiments, Science 376, 1182 (2022).
[17] A. G. Wilson, Deep learning is not so mysterious or
different (2025), arXiv:2503.02113.
[18] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever,
and R. Salakhutdinov, Dropout: A simple way to pre-
vent neural networks from overfitting, Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research 15, 1929 (2014).
[19] H. Noh, T. You, J. Mun, and B. Han, Regularizing deep
neural networks by noise: Its interpretation and opti-
mization, in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, Vol. 30 (2017).
[20] T. Miyato, T. Kataoka, M. Koyama, and Y. Yoshida,
Spectral normalization for generative adversarial net-
works, in International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations (2018).
[21] B. Dherin, M. Munn, M. Rosca, and D. G. Barrett, Why
neural networks find simple solutions: The many regu-
larizers of geometric complexity, in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, edited by A. H. Oh,
A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, and K. Cho (2022).
[22] M. Rosca, T. Weber, A. Gretton, and S. Mohamed,
A case for new neural network smoothness constraints,
in Proceedings on ”I Can’t Believe It’s Not Better!” at
NeurIPS Workshops, Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, Vol. 137, edited by J. Zosa Forde, F. Ruiz,
M. F. Pradier, and A. Schein (PMLR, 2020) pp. 21–32.
[23] P. Diaconis, Group representations in probability and
statistics, Lecture Notes-Monograph Series 11, i (1988).
[24] I. R. Kondor, Group theoretical methods in machine
learning (Columbia University, 2008).
[25] B. Sch¨olkopf and A. J. Smola, Learning with Kernels:
Support Vector Machines, Regularization, Optimization,
and Beyond (The MIT Press, 2018).
[26] I. Steinwart and A. Christmann, Support vector ma-
chines (Springer Science & Business Media, 2008).
[27] A.
Gretton,
K.
M.
Borgwardt,
M.
J.
Rasch,
B. Sch¨olkopf, and A. Smola, A kernel two-sample test,
The Journal of Machine Learning Research 13, 723
(2012).
[28] C.-L. Li, W.-C. Chang, Y. Cheng, Y. Yang, and
B. P´oczos, Mmd gan: Towards deeper understanding
of moment matching network, Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems 30 (2017).
[29] M. M. Bronstein, J. Bruna, T. Cohen, and P. Veliˇckovi´c,
Geometric
deep
learning:
Grids,
groups,
graphs,
geodesics, and gauges (2021), arXiv:2104.13478.
[30] R. Kondor and S. Trivedi, On the generalization of
equivariance and convolution in neural networks to the
action of compact groups, in International Conference
on Machine Learning (PMLR, 2018) pp. 2747–2755.
[31] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S.
Yu, A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,
IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning sys-
tems 32, 4 (2020).
[32] N. Rahaman, A. Baratin, D. Arpit, F. Draxler, M. Lin,
F. Hamprecht, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, On the
spectral bias of neural networks, in International Con-
ference on Machine Learning (PMLR, 2019) pp. 5301–
5310.
[33] Z.-Q. J. Xu, Y. Zhang, T. Luo, Y. Xiao, and Z. Ma, Fre-
quency principle: Fourier analysis sheds light on deep
neural networks (2019), arXiv:1901.06523.
[34] K. Mitarai, M. Negoro, M. Kitagawa, and K. Fu-
jii, Quantum circuit learning, Physical Review A 98,
032309 (2018).
[35] M. Schuld, V. Bergholm, C. Gogolin, J. Izaac, and
N. Killoran, Evaluating analytic gradients on quantum
hardware, Physical Review A 99, 032331 (2019).
[36] J.-G. Liu and L. Wang, Differentiable learning of quan-
tum circuit born machines, Physical Review A 98,
062324 (2018).
[37] M. S. Rudolph,
S. Lerch,
S. Thanasilp,
O. Kiss,
O. Shaya, S. Vallecorsa, M. Grossi, and Z. Holmes,
Trainability barriers and opportunities in quantum gen-
erative modeling, npj Quantum Information 10, 116
(2024).
[38] C. Moore, D. Rockmore, and A. Russell, Generic quan-
tum fourier transforms, ACM Transactions on Algo-
rithms (TALG) 2, 707 (2006).
[39] M. Schuld,
R. Sweke, and J. J. Meyer, Effect of
data encoding on the expressive power of variational
quantum-machine-learning models, Physical Review A
103, 032430 (2021).
[40] R. Lu, R. Zhang, W. Li, Z. Wei, D.-L. Deng, and Z. Liu,
A unified frequency principle for quantum and classical
machine learning (2026), arXiv:2601.03169.
[41] C. Duffy and M. Jastrzebski, Spectral bias in variational
quantum machine learning (2025), arXiv:2506.22555.
24
[42] Y.-h. Xu, D.-B. Zhang, and J. Yan, The spectral ampli-
tude principle for dynamics of quantum neural networks
(2025), arXiv:2409.06682.
[43] R. Sweke, S. Shin, and E. Gil-Fuster, Kernel-based de-
quantization of variational qml without random fourier
features (2025), arXiv:2503.23931.
[44] R. Sweke, E. Recio-Armengol, S. Jerbi, E. Gil-Fuster,
B. Fuller, J. Eisert, and J. J. Meyer, Potential and
limitations of random fourier features for dequantizing
quantum machine learning, Quantum 9, 1640 (2025).
[45] A. M. Childs and W. van Dam, Quantum algorithms
for algebraic problems, Reviews of Modern Physics 82,
1 (2010).
[46] A. Bouland, T. Giurgica-Tiron, and J. Wright, The state
hidden subgroup problem and an efficient algorithm for
locating unentanglement (2024), arXiv:2410.12706.
[47] P. Simidzija, E. Koskin, E. Y. Zhu, M. Dascal, and
M. Schuld, Solving approximate hidden subgroup prob-
lems: quantum heuristics to detect weak entanglement
(2026), arXiv:2603.15733 [quant-ph].
[48] N. Guo, K. Mitarai, and K. Fujii, Nonlinear transforma-
tion of complex amplitudes via quantum singular value
transformation, Physical Review Research 6, 043227
(2024).
[49] A. G. Rattew and P. Rebentrost, Non-linear trans-
formations of quantum amplitudes:
Exponential im-
provement,
generalization,
and applications (2023),
arXiv:2309.09839.
[50] A. Y. Kitaev, Quantum measurements and the abelian
stabilizer problem (1995), arXiv:quant-ph/9511026.
[51] V. N. Vapnik, The nature of statistical learning theory
(Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 1995).
[52] L. G. Valiant, A theory of the learnable, Communica-
tions of the ACM 27, 1134 (1984).
[53] V. Vapnik and A. Y. Chervonenkis, On the uniform con-
vergence of relative frequencies of events to their proba-
bilities, Theory of Probability and its Applications 16,
264 (1971).
[54] A. Blumer, A. Ehrenfeucht, D. Haussler, and M. K.
Warmuth, Learnability and the vapnik-chervonenkis di-
mension, Journal of the ACM (JACM) 36, 929 (1989).
[55] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, J. H. Friedman, and J. H.
Friedman, The elements of statistical learning:
data
mining, inference, and prediction, Vol. 2 (Springer,
2009).
[56] P. L. Bartlett and S. Mendelson, Rademacher and gaus-
sian complexities: Risk bounds and structural results,
Journal of Machine Learning Research 3, 463 (2002).
[57] C.
Zhang,
S.
Bengio,
M.
Hardt,
B.
Recht,
and
O. Vinyals, Understanding deep learning requires re-
thinking generalization (2016), arXiv:1611.03530.
[58] M. Belkin, D. Hsu, S. Ma, and S. Mandal, Reconcil-
ing modern machine-learning practice and the classi-
cal bias–variance trade-off, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 116, 15849 (2019).
[59] A. Jacot, F. Gabriel, and C. Hongler, Neural tangent
kernel: Convergence and generalization in neural net-
works, Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 31 (2018).
[60] D. Kalimeris, G. Kaplun, P. Nakkiran, B. Edelman,
T. Yang, B. Barak, and H. Zhang, Sgd on neural net-
works learns functions of increasing complexity, Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32
(2019).
[61] N. S. Keskar, D. Mudigere, J. Nocedal, M. Smelyanskiy,
and P. T. P. Tang, On large-batch training for deep
learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima (2016),
arXiv:1609.04836.
[62] J. Frankle and M. Carbin, The lottery ticket hypoth-
esis: Finding sparse, trainable neural networks (2018),
arXiv:1803.03635.
[63] R. E. Kirk, Experimental design, Sage handbook of
quantitative methods in psychology , 23 (2009).
[64] R. A. Bailey, P. Diaconis, D. N. Rockmore, and C. Row-
ley, A spectral analysis approach for experimental de-
signs, Excursions in Harmonic Analysis 4, 367 (2015).
[65] J. Huang, C. Guestrin, and L. J. Guibas, Efficient in-
ference for distributions on permutations, Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 20 (2007).
[66] J. Huang, C. Guestrin, and L. Guibas, Fourier theo-
retic probabilistic inference over permutations., Journal
of Machine Learning Research 10 (2009).
[67] P. Diaconis, The 1987 wald memorial lectures, The An-
nals of Statistics 17, 949 (1989).
[68] B. L. Lawson, M. E. Orrison, and D. T. Uminsky, Spec-
tral analysis of the supreme court, Mathematics Maga-
zine 79, 340 (2006).
[69] V. Belis, G. Crognaletti, M. Argenton, M. Grossi, and
M. Schuld, Probabilistic modeling over permutations
using quantum computers (2026), arXiv:2603.22401
[quant-ph].
[70] A. Rahimi and B. Recht, Random features for large-
scale kernel machines, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 20 (2007).
[71] J. Lee-Thorp, J. Ainslie, I. Eckstein, and S. Ontanon,
Fnet: Mixing tokens with fourier transforms, in Proceed-
ings of the 2022 Conference of the north American chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
human language technologies (2022) pp. 4296–4313.
[72] K. Yi, Q. Zhang, W. Fan, L. Cao, S. Wang, G. Long,
L. Hu, H. He, Q. Wen, and H. Xiong, A survey on deep
learning based time series analysis with frequency trans-
formation (2025), arXiv:2302.02173 [cs.LG].
[73] Z. Li, N. Kovachki, K. Azizzadenesheli, B. Liu, K. Bhat-
tacharya, A. Stuart, and A. Anandkumar, Fourier neu-
ral operator for parametric partial differential equations
(2021), arXiv:2010.08895 [cs.LG].
[74] A. Wilson and R. Adams, Gaussian process kernels for
pattern discovery and extrapolation, in International
Conference on Machine Learning (PMLR, 2013) pp.
1067–1075.
[75] M. G¨onen and E. Alpaydın, Multiple kernel learning
algorithms, The Journal of Machine Learning Research
12, 2211 (2011).
[76] A. G. Wilson, Z. Hu, R. Salakhutdinov, and E. P. Xing,
Deep kernel learning, in Artificial intelligence and statis-
tics (PMLR, 2016) pp. 370–378.
[77] F. Liu, W. Xu, J. Lu, G. Zhang, A. Gretton, and D. J.
Sutherland, Learning deep kernels for non-parametric
two-sample tests, in International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning (PMLR, 2020) pp. 6316–6326.
[78] Z. Yang, A. Wilson, A. Smola, and L. Song, A la carte–
learning fast kernels, in Artificial Intelligence and Statis-
tics (PMLR, 2015) pp. 1098–1106.
[79] S.
W.
Ober
and
C.
E.
Rasmussen,
Benchmark-
ing the neural linear model for regression (2019),
arXiv:1912.08416.
[80] S. W. Ober, C. E. Rasmussen, and M. van der Wilk,
25
The promises and pitfalls of deep kernel learning, in
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (PMLR, 2021) pp.
1206–1216.
[81] J. Kiessling and F. Thor, A computable definition of the
spectral bias, in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 36 (2022) pp. 7168–7175.
[82] Y. Cao, Z. Fang, Y. Wu, D.-X. Zhou, and Q. Gu, To-
wards understanding the spectral bias of deep learning
(2019), arXiv:1912.01198.
[83] R. Basri, M. Galun, A. Geifman, D. Jacobs, Y. Kasten,
and S. Kritchman, Frequency bias in neural networks for
input of non-uniform density, in International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning (PMLR, 2020) pp. 685–694.
[84] S. Arora, S. S. Du, W. Hu, Z. Li, R. R. Salakhutdinov,
and R. Wang, On exact computation with an infinitely
wide neural net, Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 32 (2019).
[85] D. Bacon, I. L. Chuang, and A. W. Harrow, Efficient
quantum circuits for schur and clebsch-gordan trans-
forms, Physical review letters 97, 170502 (2006).
[86] H. Krovi, An efficient high dimensional quantum schur
transform, Quantum 3, 122 (2019).
[87] A. Burchardt, J. Fei, D. Grinko, M. Larocca, M. Ozols,
S. Timmerman, and V. Visnevskyi, High-dimensional
quantum schur transforms (2025), arXiv:2509.22640.
[88] A. M. Childs, Lecture notes on quantum algorithms,
Lecture notes at University of Maryland 5 (2017).
[89] R. Beals, Quantum computation of fourier transforms
over symmetric groups, in Proceedings of the twenty-
ninth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing
(1997) pp. 48–53.
[90] M. P¨uschel, M. R¨otteler, and T. Beth, Fast quan-
tum fourier transforms for a class of non-abelian
groups, in International Symposium on Applied Alge-
bra, Algebraic Algorithms, and Error-Correcting Codes
(Springer, 1999) pp. 148–159.
[91] P.
Hoyer,
Efficient
quantum
transforms
(1997),
arXiv:quant-ph/9702028.
[92] M.
Schuld,
It’s
all
about
groups:
From
fast
fourier transforms to qfts, https://pennylane.ai/
qml/demos/tutorial_qft_and_groups (2025), date Ac-
cessed: 2026-01-30.
[93] S. Mohamed and B. Lakshminarayanan, Learning in im-
plicit generative models (2016), arXiv:1610.03483.
[94] D. Wakeham and M. Schuld, Inference, interference and
invariance: How the quantum fourier transform can help
to learn from data (2024), arXiv:2409.00172.
[95] B. Jaderberg, A. A. Gentile, Y. A. Berrada, E. Shishen-
ina, and V. E. Elfving, Let quantum neural networks
choose their own frequencies, Physical Review A 109,
042421 (2024).
[96] H.
Mhiri,
L.
Monbroussou,
M.
Herrero-Gonzalez,
S. Thabet, E. Kashefi, and J. Landman, Constrained
and vanishing expressivity of quantum fourier models,
Quantum 9, 1847 (2025).
[97] F. J. Schreiber, J. Eisert, and J. J. Meyer, Classical sur-
rogates for quantum learning models, Physical Review
Letters 131, 100803 (2023).
[98] Z.-L. Li and S.-X. Zhang, The dual role of low-weight
pauli propagation: A flawed simulator but a powerful
initializer for variational quantum algorithms (2025),
arXiv:2508.06358.
[99] M. S. Rudolph, T. Jones, Y. Teng, A. Angrisani,
and Z. Holmes, Pauli propagation:
A computational
framework for simulating quantum systems (2025),
arXiv:2505.21606.
[100] R. Kondor, Non-commutative harmonic analysis in
multi-object tracking, Bayesian Time Series Models ,
277 (2011).
[101] F. Auger, M. Hilairet, J. M. Guerrero, E. Monmasson,
T. Orlowska-Kowalska, and S. Katsura, Industrial ap-
plications of the kalman filter: A review, IEEE Trans-
actions on Industrial Electronics 60, 5458 (2013).
[102] P. Bermejo, P. Braccia, A. A. Mele, N. L. Diaz, A. E.
Deneris, M. Larocca, and M. Cerezo, Characterizing
quantum resourcefulness via group-fourier decomposi-
tions (2025), arXiv:2506.19696.
[103] P. Braccia and M. Schuld, Resourcefulness of quantum
states with fourier analysis, https://pennylane.ai/
qml/demos/tutorial_resourcefulness
(2025),
date
Accessed: 2026-01-24.
[104] L. Coffman, N. Diaz, M. Larocca, M. Schuld, and
M. Cerezo, Group fourier filtering of quantum resources
in quantum phase space (2026), arXiv:2601.14225.
[105] P. Wittek, Quantum machine learning:
what quan-
tum computing means to data mining (Academic Press,
2014).
[106] P. Woit, Woit, and Bartolini, Quantum theory, groups
and representations, Vol. 4 (Springer, 2017).
[107] P. L. Bartlett, P. M. Long, G. Lugosi, and A. Tsigler,
Benign overfitting in linear regression, Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 117, 30063 (2020).
[108] S. Hooker, The hardware lottery, Communications of
the ACM 64, 58 (2021).
[109] K. P. Murphy, Probabilistic machine learning: an intro-
duction (MIT press, 2022).
[110] M. Larocca, S. Thanasilp, S. Wang, K. Sharma, J. Bia-
monte, P. J. Coles, L. Cincio, J. R. McClean, Z. Holmes,
and M. Cerezo, Barren plateaus in variational quantum
computing, Nature Reviews Physics , 1 (2025).
[111] C. A. Williams, A. E. Paine, H.-Y. Wu, V. E. Elfv-
ing, and O. Kyriienko, Quantum chebyshev transform:
Mapping, embedding, learning and sampling distribu-
tions (2023), arXiv:2306.17026.
[112] J. Burkat and N. Fitzpatrick, The quantum paldus
transform: Efficient circuits with applications (2025),
arXiv:2506.09151.
[113] A. Fijany and C. P. Williams, Quantum wavelet trans-
forms: Fast algorithms and complete circuits, in NASA
international conference on quantum computing and
quantum communications (Springer, 1998) pp. 10–33.
[114] E. M. Shehata, N. Faried, and R. M. El Zafarani, A gen-
eral quantum laplace transform, Advances in Difference
Equations 2020, 613 (2020).
[115] N. Jha and A. Parakh, Quantum hilbert transform
(2025), arXiv:2505.23581.
