Machine vision with small numbers of detected photons per inference
Shi-Yuan Ma,1, ∗J´er´emie Laydevant,1 Mandar M. Sohoni,1
Logan G. Wright,1, 2, † Tianyu Wang,1, ‡ and Peter L. McMahon1, §
1School of Applied and Engineering Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
2NTT Physics and Informatics Laboratories, NTT Research, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA 94085, USA
Machine vision, including object recognition and image reconstruction, is a central technology
in many consumer devices and scientific instruments. The design of machine-vision systems has
been revolutionized by the adoption of end-to-end optimization, in which the optical front end and
the post-processing back end are jointly optimized. However, while machine vision currently works
extremely well in moderate-light or bright-light situations—where a camera may detect thousands
of photons per pixel and billions of photons per frame—it is far more challenging in very low-light
situations. We introduce photon-aware neuromorphic sensing (PANS), an approach for end-to-end
optimization in highly photon-starved scenarios. The training incorporates knowledge of the low
photon budget and the stochastic nature of light detection when the average number of photons
per pixel is near or less than 1.
We report a proof-of-principle experimental demonstration in
which we performed low-light image classification using PANS, achieving 73% (82%) accuracy on
FashionMNIST with an average of only 4.9 (17) detected photons in total per inference, and 86%
(97%) on MNIST with 8.6 (29) detected photons—orders of magnitude more photon-efficient than
conventional approaches. We also report simulation studies showing how PANS could be applied
to other classification, event-detection, and image-reconstruction tasks.
By taking into account
the statistics of measurement results for non-classical states or alternative sensing hardware, PANS
could in principle be adapted to enable high-accuracy results in quantum and other photon-starved
setups.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Deep learning has achieved remarkable successes in computer vision [1] in scenarios where reliable, well-engineered
optical detectors provide high-quality digital data that represents with high fidelity the optical scenes to be processed.
However, some sensing regimes are fundamentally different: when detection is strongly photon-limited and stochastic,
performance depends critically on how information is encoded before it reaches the detector. In such scenarios, closer
integration of physical and digital processes is essential to achieve good task performance.
A general sensing pipeline can be viewed as follows.
An object interacts with a physical carrier (e.g., light),
producing an analog signal that is measured by a detector and converted into digital data, which are then processed
on a digital computer to infer task-relevant information. In resource-scarce settings—such as low signal power or
short exposure time (both of which may correspond to detecting only a small number of photons)—the measurement
becomes highly non-deterministic and behaves like a lossy channel: only a small fraction of the object’s information
survives the detection stage. By the data processing inequality [2], once information is lost, post-processing in the
digital back end cannot recover it. Thus, when this detection bottleneck dominates, the only way to preserve more
information is to act before detection—i.e., in the physical front end—where we control how object information is
presented to the detector (e.g., illumination conditions, light propagation). Conceptually, this can be viewed as an
encoder–decoder architecture [3–6] (Fig. 1A): a physical encoder determines how information is transformed into
measurable signals at detection, followed by a digital decoder that interprets the detected data for the sensing task.
Motivated by this viewpoint, end-to-end optimization (E2E) [3, 6–11] has become a widely used approach in
computational optics, jointly optimizing the physical front end and the digital back end. In particular, neuromorphic
sensing [12–18] integrates neural-network architectures into physical encoding. However, the effectiveness of E2E
methods depends on whether the physical process is modeled with sufficient accuracy. When detection resources (e.g.,
photon counts) are abundant and measurements are reliable, simplified models may suffice; this is the common case
where high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) enables strong digital performance even if the physics is only approximately
captured. In contrast, a range of real-world sensing scenarios operate without such redundancy: severely limited
optical power (bio-imaging [19–21], minimal-interception setups [22]), stringent time constraints (high-throughput or
∗sm2725@cornell.edu; mashiyua@mit.edu; Present address: Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
† Present address: Department of Applied Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA
‡ Present address: Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
§ pmcmahon@cornell.edu
arXiv:2603.23974v1  [physics.optics]  25 Mar 2026
2
transient sensing [23]), or both [24, 25]. Under such photon-starved conditions, the stochastic nature of detection is
not a minor perturbation but the central constraint. The resulting detection bottleneck severely limits information
throughput from the physical scene to the digital model and makes end-to-end optimization substantially harder
under stringent resource budgets.
Prior work has addressed photon-starved sensing from two complementary directions. On the digital side, many
approaches seek to mitigate noise or uncertainty under restricted optical energy [26–31], but cannot affect physical
information encoding (e.g., how we illuminate the object or modulate the light field). On the physical side, decades
of work have explored efficient information extraction in low-photon regimes, for example using nonclassical light
states and carefully chosen detection bases [32–38], as well as engineered light-matter interactions [13, 39–43]. These
advancements could further benefit if combined with powerful digital back ends in a unified task-specific optimization.
B
Direct imaging
Image frames
trial 3
trial 2
Cat!
Dog!
Cat!
SPD
Physical
object
X
A
Physical
Digital
X
trial 2
Parametrized 
optical front end
Backprop
Photon-aware neuromorphic sensing
Digital back end
Backprop
Cat!
Feature frames
Limited photon counts
Cat!
Cat!
Cat!
Limited photon counts
trial 3
trial 2
trial 1
Dog!
trial 3
SPD
X
Detection
bottleneck
Single-photon
detection (SPD)
01011110... 
 Highly limited 
photon counts
Information
Physical object
Digital processing
Information loss
at detection
To be 
minimized
Conﬁgurable
sensing system
Post-processing
neural network
Active
illumination
Passive
operation
C
Mean photon
energy λ
Stochastic digital
readout a
Photon-aware stochastic
forward propagation
Gradient estimation
Estimated backpropagation
~
e-λ
· 
10001101... 
SPD
Optical front end
Digital back end
trial 1
trial 1
trial 2
trial 3
trial 1
End-to-end optimization
∂L/∂λ
 ∂L/∂a
 ∂L/∂a
FIG. 1. Detection bottleneck in optical sensing and photon-aware neuromorphic sensing (PANS) under limited
photon counts. A, Conceptual optical sensing pipeline. An object (illustrated by a cat) interacts with a probe signal (e.g.,
light) shaped by a configurable optical front end (green), which may operate in active (controlled illumination) or passive
(incoming-signal modulation) modes. The detector then converts the incident optical signal into digital data via single-photon
detection (SPD). When photon budgets are highly limited, this conversion presents a detection bottleneck with significant
information loss (lower schematic), which cannot be recovered by subsequent digital processing.
A digital back end (e.g.,
a post-processing neural network) extracts task-relevant information from the detected data. B, Direct imaging vs. PANS
under limited photons.
Top: in a conventional direct-imaging pipeline, photon-limited image frames (shown as repeated
realizations across independent trials 1, 2, 3) exhibit strong shot noise, making downstream inference challenging (e.g., cat
vs. dog).
Bottom: PANS introduces a parameterized optical front end that transforms the optical field before detection,
producing photon-efficient feature measurements; the front end and digital back end are jointly optimized end-to-end through
the stochastic detection bottleneck. C, Photon detection bottleneck. With mean photon energy λ, SPD produces a discrete
stochastic digital readout a.
PANS faithfully models this stochastic forward propagation and applies gradient estimation
to enable estimated backpropagation (backprop) through the detection bottleneck, allowing end-to-end optimization under
photon-budget constraints.
Here, we propose photon-aware neuromorphic sensing (PANS), targeting photon-starved scenarios [26–32] in which
detected optical energy (photon counts) is extremely limited, often at the level of a handful to a few tens of detected
photons per inference. In this work, we operate in the few-photon-per-inference setting where inference tasks must
be performed using only single-shot single-photon detection (SPD) measurements for each single-pixel detector in
our experimental apparatus, eliminating temporal integration. Our approach consists of two key elements. First, we
model the stochastic SPD process as it physically occurs, avoiding approximations that don’t faithfully capture the
measurement statistics in the photon-starved regime. This enables optimization under true physical constraints, with
explicit resource budgets encoded in the loss function, and preserves direct physical meaning of model parameters
(e.g., in units of photons rather than arbitrary numerical scales). Second, because standard backpropagation cannot
propagate gradients through discrete stochastic measurements, we employ effective gradient estimation techniques
that enable end-to-end training despite detection stochasticity.
We validate this framework through experiments and simulations across multiple sensing modalities. Using object
classification as a systematic benchmark, we demonstrated experimentally that photon-aware optimization can be
used to achieve high accuracy with only a handful of detected photons (2–20 total photons per inference), yielding
3
orders-of-magnitude improvements in photon efficiency over conventional approaches. We then use simulations to
explore a broader set of sensing scenarios. For active sensing with controlled illumination, we simulated real-time cell
classification for flow cytometry and pattern recognition in barcode identification. For passive sensing that processes
incoming optical signals, we simulated image classification and reconstruction through scattering multimode fibers,
transient event detection, tissue perfusion monitoring, and astronomical source classification. Across tasks, PANS
enables high performance at photon levels previously considered impractical. Together, these results suggest that
PANS can accommodate different forms of programmable optical front ends while enforcing the same photon-budgeted
optimization principle. While our work applies the PANS approach to settings with classical light and conventional
photon detection hardware, the framework may be compatible with emerging physical approaches such as quantum
states of light [34, 38, 44] and advanced sensing materials [13, 42].
II.
PHOTON-AWARE NEUROMORPHIC SENSING (PANS) WITH HIGHLY RESTRICTED PHOTON
COUNTS
The PANS framework is illustrated in Fig. 1B, alongside the conventional “direct imaging” approach in which
digital processing is applied directly to photon-limited image frames. In PANS, a parameterized optical front end
[11, 45–47] transforms the optical field into a task-specific feature space before detection, and the resulting detected
feature measurements are then processed by a digital back end.
End-to-end optimization of optical–digital pipelines is often effective when photon counts are sufficient and mea-
surements are reliable. Under highly restricted photon budgets—approaching the regime of ∼1 detected photon on
average per detector readout—measurements become intrinsically stochastic and the variability across independent
trials can dominate (Fig. 1B; Fig. A11). In this regime, training with simplified or deterministic forward models
can misrepresent the detection statistics, making optimization substantially more challenging and motivating photon-
aware modeling and learning strategies.
Photon-aware modeling of the single-photon detection process
PANS addresses the detection bottleneck by explicitly modeling photon counting as a stochastic physical process
in the forward pass. For classical light, photon arrivals follow Poisson statistics. Given an expected photon number λ
incident on an ideal single-photon detector (SPD) within a measurement window, the probability of the binary readout
a to have a click is PSPD(λ) = P(a = 1 | λ) = 1 −e−λ. We treat this binary click as the activation of a probabilistic
neuron [48–51] and model detection as a(λ) = 1t<PSPD(λ), where t ∼Uniform[0, 1] and 1{·} is the indicator function.
This photon-aware formulation differs from training pipelines that ignore detection noise or approximate it using
simplified additive perturbations. Such surrogates can be adequate when photon counts are high (λ ≫1), but they
become inaccurate in the few-photon regime (λ ∼1), where the measurement is intrinsically discrete and strongly
non-deterministic.
By sampling from the physically correct distribution during every forward pass, the model is
trained under the same detection stochasticity it will face at inference, rather than a surrogate noise model.
A key consequence is that λ retains direct physical meaning: it represents optical energy in units of photons rather
than an arbitrary numerical scale. This enables optimization under true physical constraints, with explicit photon-
budget terms encoded in the loss function, and encourages the learned optical encoding to preserve task-relevant
information through the lossy detection channel.
Effective gradient estimation for stochastic forward propagation
Photon-aware modeling introduces a computational challenge: the sampled binary click a ∈{0, 1} is discrete and
non-differentiable, so standard backpropagation cannot propagate gradients through the SPD sampling operation. To
enable end-to-end optimization through the stochastic detection bottleneck, we employ straight-through estimators
(STEs) [51–53], which replace the undefined derivative ∂a/∂λ with a surrogate during backpropagation.
In our setting, we find that the naive identity STE (∂a/∂λ ≈1) is not well matched to the SPD nonlinearity in our
regime of interest (when the photon budget is low). Instead, we use a damped STE that scales gradients according to
photon flux:
∂L
∂λ = ∂L
∂a · ∂a
∂λ ≈∂L
∂a · e−λ.
(1)
4
This implements adaptive gradient scaling: gradients flow in the informative low-flux regime and are naturally sup-
pressed when photon counts increase. Other damping functions with similar qualitative behavior are possible; we
adopt e−λ for its direct connection to PSPD(λ) (Appendix 1B).
Together with exact stochastic sampling in the forward pass, this estimator enables joint end-to-end training of
the optical front end and digital back end through the stochastic detection bottleneck using standard deep-learning
frameworks.
8.5 photons, 77%
17 photons, 82%
18 photons, 13%
10 photons, 11%
100 photons, 36%
106 photons, 93%
E
B
106 photons
103 photons
100 photons
10 photons
4.9 photons, 73%
17 photons, 82%
A
D
F
Nillu
Ndet
Mutual information
with labels
Fisher discriminant 
ratio (FDR)
Test accuracy (%)
Shirt
Pullover
True label
True label
Predicted label
Predicted label
Ndet
C
Nillu
Illumination
photons
Ndet
Detected
photons
Active photon-aware neuromorphic sensing (PANS)
Feature frame
Loss = Error + α Nillu
Backpropagation
Sneaker!
End-to-end optimization
Uniform
illumination
Direct imaging
Ιmage frame
Sandal?
Patterned
illumination
Object
Object
Physical
Digital
Digital
Physical
SPD
SPD
w1
w2
wdf
...
...
...
1
2
df
df
1
2
dobj
Random guess
Random guess
dobj
Simulation: non-PA E2E
Patterned
illumination
w1
w2
wdf
...
Structured
illumination
w1
w2
wdf
...
FIG. 2. Active photon-aware neuromorphic sensing (PANS) demonstrated on FashionMNIST object classifica-
tion. A, Direct imaging (conventional approach). Uniform illumination probes the object, and single-photon detectors directly
capture an image frame with dobj pixels.
Nillu and Ndet denote average total illumination and detection photon budgets,
respectively. The example object image (a sneaker) is taken from the FashionMNIST dataset. B, Image frames degrade with
decreasing Ndet (denoted above each column) for a pullover (top) and a shirt (bottom). Frames become increasingly noisy as
the photon budget decreases. C, Quantifying information loss at the detection bottleneck. As Ndet decreases (left to right),
three metrics decline: mutual information with labels (top), Fisher discriminant ratio (FDR; middle), and the test accuracy
using a convolutional neural network (bottom). D, Active PANS (our approach). df illumination patterns are projected onto
the object, producing a df-dimensional feature vector through single-photon detection (see Fig. 3 and Appendix 12 for details
of the experimental protocol). E, Experimental results on FashionMNIST. Top: confusion matrices at two different photon
budgets. Bottom: Test accuracy vs. Ndet (left) and Nillu (right). Nillu is the total illumination incident on the object (uniform
for direct imaging; sum of pattern intensities for structured illumination; Appendix 5). Red markers: active PANS experiment
(mean ± std over 30 trials per image) for df = 3, 4, 6, 10, 16, 24, 32; light red shade: corresponding simulation (mean ± 3 std).
Blue curve: direct imaging baseline (from C). Green curve: conventional E2E without photon-aware modeling (non-PA E2E;
Appendix 8C). F, 2D t-SNE [54] visualization comparing feature distributions. Active PANS (red boxes) versus direct imaging
(blue boxes) at different Ndet values, with test accuracies shown.
5
III.
QUANTIFYING INFORMATION LOSS AT THE DETECTION BOTTLENECK
When photon budgets are highly limited, the conversion from optical signals to digital readouts becomes a severe
information bottleneck: task-relevant information can be irreversibly lost at detection and cannot be recovered by sub-
sequent digital processing. To build intuition, we first quantify how photon shot noise alone degrades the information
content of direct-imaging frames as photon counts decrease (see Appendix 8A for more details).
Consider the direct-imaging frame in Fig. 2A: despite knowing the candidate classes, a photon-limited realization
can be visually ambiguous (e.g., resembling a “sandal” rather than the true label “sneaker”). Fig. 2B illustrates this
effect systematically using FashionMNIST examples of a “pullover” (top) and a “shirt” (bottom). With Ndet = 106
photons per frame, frames closely match the ground truth. As Ndet decreases, frames become increasingly dominated
by shot noise; by Ndet = 10 photons, they contain little visually discernible structure. Even at Ndet = 103 photons,
distinguishing “pullover” from “shirt” is difficult by inspection.
To quantify this information loss, we compute the mutual information (MI) [55] between photon-limited frames and
class labels, measuring how much label-relevant information remains available for classification (Fig. 2C, top). We
also compute the Fisher discriminant ratio (FDR) [56], which compares inter-class separation to intra-class variability
(middle). Both metrics decrease rapidly once Ndet drops below ∼104–105 photons per frame. An AlexNet-style
convolutional network [57] trained on these frames shows a corresponding accuracy degradation (bottom), consistent
with the optical-energy dependence observed in optical neural network implementations [58–60].
Crucially, this analysis includes only ideal photon shot noise and excludes additional detector imperfections (e.g.,
dark counts or read out noise). It therefore represents a best-case lower bound on information loss for a given photon
budget. Any information not retained through this physical bottleneck is no longer available to subsequent digital
processing.
IV.
ACTIVE PANS USING STRUCTURED ILLUMINATION
Active optical sensing designs illumination patterns to estimate object properties efficiently and has a long history
in computational optics (e.g., compressive sensing [61, 62]) with applications in LiDAR [63, 64], transient sensing
[23, 65], and biomedical imaging [66–69].
Recent work has explored end-to-end optimization of illumination for
specific tasks [70–74]. We instantiate PANS in this setting by training structured illumination patterns end-to-end
under photon-aware modeling of the detection bottleneck.
Learned structured illumination in the optical front end
In active PANS, df learned illumination patterns are projected onto the object, yielding a df-dimensional feature
measurement before detection (Fig. 2D). Each pattern specifies a nonnegative spatial intensity distribution ⃗w ∈Rdobj
≥0
applied across the dobj object pixels. Under one pattern, the transmitted signal is integrated by a photon counter,
producing an expected detected photon number λ = ⃗w · ⃗x (Fig. A2), where ⃗x ∈Rdobj
≥0 denotes the object transmission
(or reflectance). Collecting df patterns forms a matrix W ∈Rdf×dobj
≥0
that maps object space to a df-dimensional
feature space, the detected and followed by a digital back end (Appendix 3).
A central goal in photon-starved sensing is to minimize optical energy while maintaining task performance. Because
PANS models single-photon detection in physically meaningful units, photon budgets can be imposed directly during
training. In particular, we use an objective of the form
Loss = Error + α Nillu,
(2)
where Nillu is the total illumination photon budget and α controls the accuracy–energy trade-off (Appendix 6D). This
allows the illumination patterns to be optimized end-to-end under explicit photon constraints.
Case study: Experimental demonstration on FashionMNIST
We tested this architecture experimentally on FashionMNIST classification [75], training illumination patterns
jointly with a digital classifier (Appendix 6) and deploying them to an OLED array calibrated to the ultra-low-light
regime (Appendices 11–12). Fig. 2E reports results for df ∈{3, 4, 6, 10, 16, 24, 32} illumination patterns. We report
Ndet as the total number of detected photons per inference, summed over all measurements and averaged over the
6
...
Inference 1
Inference 2
Inference nT
df illumination
patterns
...
w1
w2
w
x
x
x
Fashion MNIST
A
B
df
4.9 photons, 73.2%
df
8.6 photons, 77.2%
17 photons, 82.1%
2.1 photons, 62.6%
C
...
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
...
...
...
...
...
Trial 1
Trial 2
Trial nT
Output distribution of 
nT single-shot inferences
...
Feature vector: trial 1
Feature vector: trial 2
Feature vector: trial nT
29 photons, 97.2%
18 photons, 95.1%
8.6 photons, 85.7%
13 photons, 91.9%
 MNIST
Digital back end
Digital back end
Digital back end
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
df
FIG. 3. Stochastic single-shot inference and experimental validation of active PANS. A, Stochastic single-shot
inference under extreme photon constraints. df learned illumination patterns {⃗wi}df
i=1 are sequentially projected onto an object
with transmission ⃗x, each producing a binary single-photon detection (SPD) readout. Because detection is highly stochastic
at these photon levels, nT independent trials on the same object yield different feature vectors (bottom), each processed by
the digital back end. Despite this trial-to-trial variability, the system consistently identifies the correct class across trials. The
aggregate output distribution over nT inferences (right) reflects the classification confidence (Appendix 13). B–C, Experimental
classification accuracy (red, mean ± std over nT = 30 trials) versus number of illumination patterns df for FashionMNIST (B)
and MNIST (C) under single-shot operation. The FashionMNIST data correspond to the red markers in Fig. 2E, here plotted
against df. Simulation results (light red band, mean ± 3 std) show close agreement with experiment. Annotations indicate the
average total detected photon budget per inference Ndet at selected df (Appendix 13).
test set, and Nillu as the corresponding total illumination energy incident on the object (Appendices 5, 8A). Active
PANS achieves 73% accuracy with only Ndet = 4.9 total detected photons and 82% with Ndet = 17 (Appendix 13)—
performance levels comparable to recent optical neural network demonstrations operating at substantially higher
optical power [47, 76], and orders of magnitude more photon-efficient than conventional approaches.
Active PANS substantially outperforms direct imaging (blue curve) at matched photon budgets. To isolate the
contribution of photon-aware modeling (Fig. A1), we evaluate a conventional end-to-end baseline (non-PA E2E; green
curve) that uses the same architecture but does not model the stochastic SPD process, instead training with approxi-
mated expected values and quantization-aware training [59, 60, 77] (Appendix 8C). At each Ndet, the green curve shows
the best accuracy achieved among separately trained models with different df (Appendix 8C; Fig. A15). While this
baseline improves over direct imaging, a clear gap remains in the extreme few-photon regime, highlighting the benefit
of optimizing end-to-end through the stochastic detection bottleneck. Compressive sensing baselines, which use fixed
non-task-specific patterns, perform worse than the E2E baseline and are reported separately (Appendices 2D, 8B).
The t-SNE visualization [54] (Fig. 2F; Figs. A12, A24) further illustrates how active PANS preserves task-relevant
structure under photon starvation. Compared with direct imaging at similar photon budgets, PANS yields markedly
7
improved class separation, confirming that the optimized front end retains more information through the detection
bottleneck.
Stochastic inference and experimental validation
Fig. 3 details the experimental implementation (Appendices 11–13). At these photon levels, each single-shot infer-
ence is highly stochastic: the same object probed under identical conditions yields different detected feature vectors
across independent trials (Fig. 3A, bottom; Fig. A25). Despite this trial-to-trial variability, the optimized system
consistently identifies the correct class, as reflected in the aggregate output distribution over nT trials (Fig. 3A, right;
Fig. A26). The accuracy values reported in Fig. 2E correspond to the mean (± standard deviation) over nT = 30
trials on 200 test images.
Fig. 3B replots the experimental FashionMNIST results from Fig. 2E as a function of df, and Fig. 3C extends the
evaluation to MNIST, both alongside simulations of the same photon-aware models. The close agreement across the
full range of pattern counts confirms that the stochastic models are robust to realistic experimental imperfections
(Appendix 7), validating the PANS framework. For MNIST, active PANS achieves 95.1% (85.7%) accuracy using
only 18 (8.6) detected photons in total—comparable to state-of-the-art works [59, 60] operating at photon budgets
3–4 orders of magnitude higher (see Discussion).
Simulation: Real-time sensing applications
Our experimental demonstration uses time-multiplexing: patterns are projected sequentially and measured with
a single detector. In applications where pattern switching limits throughput, active PANS can be implemented in
parallel. We therefore propose a wavelength-multiplexed scheme (Fig. 4A), where different illumination patterns are
encoded on distinct optical frequencies and separated by dispersive optics (e.g., gratings) for simultaneous detection on
multiple detectors. Recent demonstrations of single-photon spectrometers with >400 modes spanning 580–660 nm [78]
suggest feasibility. With df ∼10 patterns spanning only a few nanometers, dispersion is negligible. This enables static
illumination fields with throughput limited only by detector rates, reaching >GHz speeds with existing technology
[79].
We evaluate this parallelized active PANS concept in simulation on two real-time tasks (Appendix 9). First, we
consider flow cytometric cell classification [25] (Fig. A16), where both low illumination (to reduce photodamage
[19, 20]) and rapid decision-making are essential. PANS achieves ∼90% accuracy with ∼5 detected photons and
remains robust to realistic dark count rates (DCRs; Fig. 4B). We further simulate continuous operation in which cells
enter and exit the illumination field; Fig. 4C shows the evolving activation vectors and corresponding predictions,
illustrating real-time readout without reconstructing full image frames.
Additionally, we study a barcode identification task that requires recognizing a target bit pattern at arbitrary
locations (Fig. 4D; Fig. A17). The goal is to decide whether a 10-bar segment contains the sequence “1010,” like
a Turing machine tape reader. Active PANS achieves near-unity accuracy with ∼5 detected photons (Fig. 4E),
consistently across multiple noise conditions including realistic DCRs. In contrast, direct imaging (simulated with
ideal shot noise only) performs poorly at these photon levels.
V.
PASSIVE PANS WITH OPTICAL LINEAR OPERATIONS
Optical linear processors have driven decades of advancement in optical neural networks [80], with mature imple-
mentations in both free-space [46, 81–84] and integrated platforms [85–87]. Here we show in simulation that PANS
extends naturally to passive optical encoders that apply learnable transformations to incident optical fields. In con-
trast to active PANS, passive PANS does not require illumination control: it processes existing optical signals under
observation, making it applicable to a broad range of sensing settings.
As in active PANS, we model the optical front end as a linear operator W representing the transmission matrix
of an optical processor [88]. For the demonstrations below, we focus on coherent inputs and real-valued W [81–83],
a standard regime for many established linear optical processors; passive processing of incoherent signals [89] is also
possible and exhibits qualitatively similar behavior. After the optical transformation, the detected optical energy is
given by the squared norm of the transformed field amplitudes, followed by single-photon detection (Appendix 4).
8
a1
a3
a2
Cell ﬂow
Static illumination
patterns
Photon
counter array
w3
w2
w1
Barcode identiﬁcation for code "1010"
Cell classiﬁcation task
A
B
C
D
Digital processing
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
...
Illumination ﬁeld
E
0
0
1 1 1
1
Time
Membrane
Nucleolus
Mitochondria
FIG. 4. Proposed real-time image sensing with active photon-aware neuromorphic sensing (PANS) in simu-
lation. A, Conceptual wavelength-multiplexed implementation for flow-cytometric cell sorting. Multiple static illumination
patterns at distinct optical wavelengths (illustrated as ⃗w1, ⃗w2, ⃗w3 with different colors) are applied simultaneously; wavelength
demultiplexing routes each channel to a dedicated photon counter, producing activations (a1, a2, a3) in parallel for real-time
digital processing. B, Simulated test accuracy for cell-organelle classification versus total detected photons Ndet under different
detector dark-count rates (DCRs), compared with an ideal direct-imaging baseline. C, Example real-time sequence. Left:
representative frames as a cell traverses the illumination field (top to bottom). Right: corresponding model outputs over time
across classes (Mem.: membrane; Nuc.: nucleolus; Mit.: mitochondria; Null: no cell present). D, Barcode identification task.
The illumination field spans a 10-bar window (red box); the goal is to decide whether the target subsequence “1010” appears
at any position. E, Simulated test accuracy for barcode identification versus Ndet under multiple DCR values. Direct imaging
accounts only for ideal shot noise (no dark counts or additional detector noise), highlighting the robustness of active PANS
under realistic counting noise.
Simulation: MMF-based image sensing—classification and reconstruction
We first demonstrate passive PANS for image sensing through multimode fibers (MMFs), which scramble spatial
information into speckle patterns [90] (Appendix 10). Recent work demonstrated image reconstruction through MMFs
using diffractive optical elements [91]; we extend this setup to the extreme few-photon regime. Input images propagate
through an MMF, emerging as random speckles (Fig. 5A; Fig. A18). In passive PANS, an optimized optical encoder
transforms these speckles before single-photon detection; in direct imaging, speckle frames are captured directly under
the same photon budget Ndet.
For MNIST digit classification through an MMF, passive PANS with a two-layer MLP achieves ∼90% accuracy
at Ndet ∼10 photons, while direct imaging requires hundreds of photons to exceed 50% (Fig. 5B, inset). We also
evaluated image reconstruction using structural similarity index measure (SSIM) as the quality metric, averaged over
10,000 test images (Fig. 5C–D; Fig. A18; Appendix 10A). Passive PANS achieves SSIM ∼0.7 at Ndet ∼10 photons
(Fig. 5C). As expected, reconstruction demands more photons than classification since it requires retaining more
complete information of the objects.
Both tasks maintain robustness against realistic dark count rates (1–10%),
demonstrating practical viability.
9
Debris
detected
Perfused
tissue
Emission
nebula
Planetary
nebula
No
debris
Transient event detected
PANS sensor
Monitored ﬁeld
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Tissue speckle identiﬁcation
Nebula classiﬁcation
Fiber end-face inspection
Scattering MMF
Original
image
Speckle
image
Ιmage frame
Classiﬁcation
Reconstruction
Direct imaging
It's 6!
Original images
Speckle images
Reconstructed images
Ndet
Ndet
Ndet
Ndet
Ndet
Ndet
Field of view
Passive
optical encoder
Feature frame
Passive PANS
End-to-end optimization
...
...
Optimizated
optical encoder
Detection
        = 103
Ndet 
High-photon regime
SPD
SPD
        = 250
Ndet 
High-photon regime
Ndet
High-photon regime
        =102, 67%
Ndet 
Static
tissue
Transient event detection
Sensing through a multimode ﬁber (MMF)
FIG. 5.
Diagram and applications of passive photon-aware neuromorphic sensing (PANS) in simulation. A,
Passive PANS vs. direct imaging for sensing images transmitted through a scattering multimode fiber (MMF). Input images
propagate through the MMF, emerging as speckle patterns that scramble spatial information.
In passive PANS, speckles
pass through a passive optical encoder before detection; in direct imaging, speckle frames are captured directly at the image
plane with Ndet photons per frame. Both schemes use post-processing neural networks for classification or reconstruction. B,
Classification accuracy on MNIST speckle images versus Ndet, with dark count rates (DCRs) of 1%, 5%, and 10% for passive
PANS. Direct imaging (blue curve) simulated using only ideal shot noise. Inset: direct imaging accuracy at higher Ndet. Red
markers show passive PANS with df = 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 16, 24, 32. C, Average structural similarity index (SSIM) of reconstructed
images from scattered speckles, evaluated with different DCRs.
Passive PANS data points: df = 4, 6, 8, 10, 32, 48, 64.
D,
Example images showing original MNIST digits (top), corresponding speckle patterns (middle), and reconstructed images
(bottom) from passive PANS (df = 64, DCR = 1%). E, Transient event detection: fleeting objects in noisy backgrounds are
identified in a monitored scene (left). Right: test accuracy vs. Ndet. Passive PANS: df = 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10. F, Tissue blood flow
detection via speckle contrast imaging. G, Compact nebula classification. H, Optical fiber end-face contamination inspection.
Insets show direct imaging performance at higher photon counts.
10
Simulation: Transient event detection and diverse applications
Passive PANS is particularly effective when weak and fleeting signals must be detected against noisy backgrounds—
a common challenge in biomedical imaging, astronomy, security monitoring, and industrial inspection.
Fig. 5E
demonstrates transient event detection (Appendix 10B) where brief objects appear in a noisy scene under uniform
coherent illumination; here, the transient contribution is small compared with background fluctuations (Fig. A19),
and direct imaging degrades sharply at low photon budgets. Passive PANS reliably detects transient events in this
regime, achieving > 95% accuracy where direct imaging struggles.
To illustrate broad applicability, we further validate passive PANS across biomedical, astronomical, and industrial
domains (Fig. 5F–H; Figs. A20–A22). Speckle-contrast imaging (Fig. 5F) detects blood flow by identifying reduced
speckle contrast in perfused versus ischemic tissue [92, 93], enabling low-dose perfusion monitoring during surgery
and endoscopy (Appendix 10C). Nebula classification (Fig. 5G) separates planetary from emission nebulae using
narrow-band imaging (e.g., Hα, [OIII] [94, 95]), where quasi-monochromatic emission and compact angular sizes
support coherence—highlighting performance on inherently faint astronomical targets (Appendix 10D). Fiber end-
face inspection (Fig. 5H) detects surface contamination relevant to telecommunications and laboratory optics; passive
PANS enables continuous monitoring by tapping only a small fraction of the signal, without disrupting primary
operation (Appendix 10E).
Across these tasks, passive PANS achieves high performance with orders of magnitude lower optical energy than
direct imaging in comparable photon-limited regimes, highlighting a task-agnostic strategy for preserving information
through the detection bottleneck when optical power or acquisition time is severely constrained. Together with active
PANS (Section IV), these results demonstrate a general paradigm: programmable physical transformations before
detection, optimized end-to-end under photon-aware modeling, to maximize task-relevant information flow under
extreme resource limits.
VI.
DISCUSSION
In this work, we have reported high accuracy on machine-vision tasks, including image recognition and reconstruc-
tion, even when only a handful of photons in total are detected—a situation in which accuracy would ordinarily be
very low. One can think of information about an object as encountering a bottleneck before classification occurs
due to there being a limited number of photons conveying information about the object, either because there were
few photons illuminating the object to begin with, or because few of them successfully arrived at a detector and
were detected, or both. Our proposed photon-aware neuromorphic sensing (PANS) framework enables optimization
considering the actual physical constraints rather than coarse approximations. This allows the system to maximize
task-relevant information [96] flow through the bottleneck under extreme resource limitations. We restricted our sens-
ing setup to a few photon detectors, each performing only a single-shot measurement per inference, and demonstrated
high performance with only ∼1–10 detected photons. Our results demonstrate that accurately modeling physical
processes in sensing can enhance performance in the highly photon-starved regime.
Relation to previous work
Existing approaches to photon-limited sensing can be categorized by how they address the detection bottleneck.
Many methods operate exclusively through digital post-processing without altering the physical front end [26–31, 97,
98]. While such approaches can extract information from noisy measurements, they are fundamentally constrained
by only operating on post-detection data and cannot recover information already lost at the detection bottleneck [2]
(Fig. 1A, Fig. 2C).
Other approaches employ various modifications in the optical hardware—including structured illumination [62,
68, 99], meta-optical elements [9, 39, 41, 100–102], and diffractive elements [10, 81, 88, 91, 103].
Many of these
demonstrations use strategies that are not task-specific [68, 104]. In works that optimize the physical front end for
specific tasks [3, 6–16], the highly stochastic nature of photon detection of weak light is typically not incorporated
explicitly into the optimization, despite being central in the few-photon regime (see the taxonomy in Fig. A1 and
Table A1). Meanwhile, many end-to-end optimization demonstrations [70–74, 100] focus on photon budgets where
optimization remains well-conditioned through the detection stage.
Works targeting low-light scenarios while optimizing the front end generally focus on noise resilience of detection
hardware rather than photon-aware modeling of the information encoding itself. In the optical-neural-network (ONN)
community, Ref. [58] proposed low-optical-energy ONNs in simulation, projecting < 1 photon per multiply-accumulate
11
(MAC) operation—equivalent to roughly 104–106 photons per layer for reasonable accuracy. Even the most photon-
efficient experimental ONN implementations [59, 60] require ∼5 × 104 to 8 × 104 photons to achieve 90% accuracy
on MNIST when only the first optical layer is considered. This represents 3 orders of magnitude more photons than
our approach, which achieves 91.9% test accuracy with only 13 detected photons (Fig. 3C, Table A7).
The closest related result we could find in the literature is in Ref. [105], which reported ∼90% MNIST classification
accuracy with ∼103 detected photons (two orders of magnitude larger than the light levels in our experiments). Their
approach relies on first-photon imaging [97], detecting photon arrival times rather than intensities via time-correlated
single-photon counting. This effectively trades photon counts for temporal resolution: using ∼104 detection time bins
makes their system ∼104 times slower, making it unsuitable for sensing tasks where the signal is weak and transient.
Furthermore, first-photon timing measurements are highly sensitive to dark counts, whereas PANS maintains high
robustness across realistic experimental conditions (Figs. 4B, 4E, 5B–H; Fig. A10).
The key distinction of our approach is the modeling of the stochastic detection process, which enables effective
end-to-end optimization. By modeling the physical process we fully optimize the entire system against the actual
constraints to maximize performance under extreme resource limitations.
Key factors of our approach
Building on this distinction, we identify two major factors that empower PANS to function effectively at such low
photon levels: information compression and accurate photon-aware modeling.
Information compression, which has been explored in image sensing [10, 15, 76, 102, 106] and compressive sensing
[61, 62], leverages the fact that task-specific information [96] is often significantly lower-dimensional than the full
image data. For a given task, fewer detectors may suffice; by projecting onto this lower-dimensional subspace, the
limited photon budget is concentrated onto task-relevant dimensions rather than spread across the full image space.
This insight underlies the effectiveness of many end-to-end approaches. However, compression alone does not tell the
entire story. For instance, in the barcode identification task (Fig. 4D), the number of detectors (df ranging from 2
to 16) was not always smaller than the dimension of the original input (dobj = 10), yet PANS still achieved superior
performance even with a higher-dimensional feature space. Moreover, illumination patterns optimized through con-
ventional methods—which do not model the stochastic detection process—exhibited significantly poorer performance
than PANS even with smaller df (Fig. 2E; Appendices 8B–8D).
The second and more critical factor is the probabilistic model we developed to faithfully represent the single-
photon detection process through photon-aware forward propagation
[51, 77].
This model simulates the actual
physical process as a noisy channel, explicitly linking uncertainty to photon budgets. During optimization, this forces
the system to prioritize photon allocation to features that maximally extract task-relevant information under the
given constraints. This resembles the search for an optimal receiver in quantum sensing, where a unitary operation
transforms the sensor’s measurement basis to maximize state discrimination efficiency [107]. Although our models
here are based on straightforward Poissonian photon statistics, our use of them already yielded significant gains in
ultra-low-light sensing.
Distinction between sensing and ML acceleration
Much work in optical neural networks (ONNs) aims to accelerate machine-learning inference or training by moving
parts of the computation from electronics into optics for speed and energy gains. Our goal is related but fundamentally
different: sensing under stringent detection-energy constraints. This shift changes what should be optimized and where
the bottlenecks lie.
First, the optimization target is different. In ONN accelerators, computation itself is the scarce resource: the entire
pipeline is judged by end-to-end latency and energy, so every multiplication, memory access, and conversion (between
electronics and optics, and between the digital and analog domains) matters. In our setting, the scarce resource are
the detected photons. We do not treat downstream digital processing of the digital record of the detected photons
as the primary constraint (compute-limited sensing is a valid but different topic of study, which is outside the scope
of our work). The key question is therefore: given a fixed detection budget (e.g., photons, detector throughput,
temporal bandwidth), how should the optical front end shape and allocate measurements to capture the maximum
task-relevant information—even if the subsequent reconstruction or inference is computationally expensive.
Second, the detection stage becomes the dominant bottleneck. Unlike ONN accelerators, which can often buffer
intermediate activations and repeatedly access stored digital values, many sensing signals are transient and cannot
be replayed.
The detection stage therefore serves as the sole interface between the analog physical process and
downstream digital processing, and this interface is lossy [2]: any information not captured at detection is permanently
12
lost. Consequently, the front end must be designed to preserve as much task-relevant information as possible through
this one-shot transition, rather than to minimize digital-post-processing operations.
Finally, the evaluation baseline differs. Optical accelerators must justify themselves against highly optimized digital
electronic hardware, where overheads such as analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversions can erode gains from
analog optical processing. In contrast, sensing tasks inherently originate in the analog domain, which digital systems
cannot access directly. This creates a natural opportunity for analog physical computing to provide value: by directly
interfacing with physical signals and allocating scarce detection resources (e.g., photon budgets, detector throughput,
temporal bandwidth) toward task-relevant features.
These considerations motivate PANS as a co-design problem: jointly optimizing the optical front end and the
digital back end to maximize information retention under physical constraints at detection. In this sense, PANS can
leverage the same programmable photonic hardware and optimization techniques developed in the ONN community,
but repurpose them from compute acceleration to a sensing-centric goal: optimizing the optical front end to retain
maximal task-relevant information under detection constraints, aligning with a broader trend toward task-driven
optical sensing [12–18].
Robustness and broad applications
Our results demonstrate that PANS is robust to several non-idealities commonly encountered in practice, including
detector and background noise (collectively modeled as dark count rate, DCR), source intensity fluctuations, and
imperfections in optical operations (Appendix 7). This robustness is important for translating PANS from controlled
demonstrations to realistic deployed sensing systems.
Because energy scales with both optical power and integration time, operating at an ultra-low photon budget benefits
not only low-light settings where available power is limited, but also regimes that demand short time windows and
high temporal resolution. For example, our transient-event-detection task (Fig. 5E; Fig. A19) captures a broadly
useful morphology—rare, brief deviations from a noisy background—and could be extended to applications such as
airborne contamination monitoring in cleanrooms, quality assurance in pharmaceutical manufacturing, conveyor-belt
inspection for surface defects, pest detection in food-processing lines, and security perimeter monitoring.
PANS is also attractive when the measurement must minimally disturb the original system. In such settings, a
passive optical tap (e.g., a weak beam splitter) can route only a negligible fraction of the light to the PANS front end
while leaving the primary optical path essentially unchanged. As a concrete example, for continuous monitoring of
contamination on optical fiber ends (Fig. 5H; Fig. A22), PANS could analyze a weakly tapped signal to detect stains
or debris without disrupting normal operation, aligning with broader goals of low-disturbance sensing in security and
monitoring scenarios [22].
Limitation: Expressivity of the programmable optical front end
The performance of this framework heavily depends on the optical front end. As shown in Fig. 1A, the optical
front end is the only component before the lossy detection bottleneck that is configurable. In this work, we only
demonstrated linear operations in the optical domain.
A practical rule of thumb to determine if low-light sensing with linear PANS may be able to yield good results
for a given task, and what optical front end may be required, is: if the task is solvable with a shallow network on
low-dimensional features, then a linear optical encoder + photodetection + a digital back end could be sufficient;
tasks requiring more sophisticated processing likely need more expressive optical front ends.
Recent studies have explored nonlinearity in ONN implementations [15, 76, 106, 108–110], demonstrating that
hybrid optical–electronic neural networks that involve some nonlinearity outperform those with only linear operations.
From a computation perspective, ONNs featuring nonlinearity are more expressive than those featuring only linear
operations. From a sensing perspective, nonlinear encoders better preserve task-relevant information through the
detection bottleneck, enabling more effective extraction by the digital back end. In the optical experiments we report,
we only used linear operations in the optical front end. A natural extension of our work would be to incorporate a
more expressive optical front-end architecture.
Outlook: Sensing when the background noise is dominant
While PANS is robust to realistic noise levels as discussed above (see also Appendix 7), this robustness is not
unlimited. In many practical sensing scenarios, additive noise can far exceed the signal—for example, when detecting
13
faint sources against strong thermal backgrounds, or when using photon detectors whose dark counts dominate at low
signal levels [111]. When such noise buries the signal at detection, information about the object is effectively lost.
To sense under these conditions, one can exploit physical properties in which the signal remains distinguishable from
the background, such as wavelength [21], arrival time [23], or photon correlations [32, 34, 38, 112]. These represent
natural extensions of the physical front end that could further broaden the range of sensing scenarios accessible at
extreme photon budgets.
Outlook: Quantum and other systems in the physical front end
Beyond classical light states and detection processes, our approach could be extended to other physical settings, such
as those involving nonclassical optical states [32, 34, 38] and novel light-matter interactions that can be exploited for
sensing tasks, including in 2D materials [13, 16, 42], spintronics [113, 114], and other physical processes [43, 115, 116].
The field of quantum-optical sensing has long focused on maximizing sensing efficiency with limited photon counts,
achieving significant developments [32, 34, 38, 117, 118].
Crucially, the detection processes in these systems are
often inherently discrete and stochastic—precisely the regime where PANS’s photon-aware modeling can provide a
principled path to end-to-end optimization across the physical–digital interface.
Outlook: Optimization beyond gradient-based algorithms
This work adopted gradient-based optimization that is compatible with state-of-the-art deep learning techniques.
However, for general physical systems, alternative approaches such as in-situ training, backpropagation-free or label-
free methods [6, 119, 120] could further improve training efficiency. While these non-gradient methods have yet to
match the performance of gradient-based optimizers, future developments in optimization techniques remain critical
for advancing configurable systems, especially for stochastic, physical ones.
Outlook: Rigorous bounds for information propagation with limited physical resources
Although our heuristic optimization approach has demonstrated effective practical performance, determining a
tight lower bound on the number of photons required for a given task remains an open question. Quantum theorists
have successfully derived bounds for simpler tasks, such as binary hypothesis testing in quantum illumination [34],
and rigorous bounds can guide experimentalists towards optimal operations [112]. Metrics like Fisher information
per photon have also been studied [36, 74]. However, questions like what is the minimum detected photon count
required to classify FashionMNIST with 80% test accuracy? are far more challenging due to the high dimensionality
of such tasks and the fact that class boundaries are only implicitly defined through finite training data, making a
clean information-theoretic formulation difficult. Addressing these questions remains an important and compelling
direction for future research [121–123].
DATA AND CODE AVAILABILITY
All simulation and experimental data, trained model weights, and analysis code needed to reproduce the results
presented in this paper are available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.19210131.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
S.-Y.M., L.G.W., T.W., and P.L.M. conceived the project. S.-Y.M., T.W. and L.G.W. designed the experiments
and built the experimental setup. S.-Y.M. developed the theoretical framework. S.-Y.M. performed the numerical
simulations, experimental data collection, and data analysis, with assistance from T.W., J.L., M.M.S. and L.G.W.
S.-Y.M. wrote the manuscript with input from all authors. P.L.M. supervised the project.
14
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank NTT Research for their financial and technical support (S.-Y.M., P.L.M., T.W. and L.G.W.). Portions
of this work were supported by the National Science Foundation (award no. CCF-1918549; J.L., P.L.M. and T.W.)
and a David and Lucile Packard Foundation Fellowship (P.L.M.). We acknowledge discussions with Xingjian Bai,
Saumil Bandyopadhyay, Chaohan Cui, Dirk Englund, Ryan Hamerly, Mahmoud Jalali Mehrabad and Tatsuhiro On-
odera.
COMPETING INTERESTS
S.-Y.M., T.W. and P.L.M. are listed as inventors on a U.S. provisional patent application (No. 63/974,312) on the
techniques to optimize and implement a hybrid optical sensing system.
[1] A. Voulodimos, N. Doulamis, A. Doulamis, and E. Protopapadakis, Deep learning for computer vision: A brief review.
Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience 2018, 7068349 (2018).
[2] N. J. Beaudry and R. Renner, An intuitive proof of the data processing inequality. arXiv preprint arXiv:1107.0740 (2011).
[3] D. Deb, Z. Jiao, R. Sims, A. Chen, M. Broxton, M. B. Ahrens, K. Podgorski, and S. C. Turaga, FourierNets enable
the design of highly non-local optical encoders for computational imaging. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 35, 25224–25236 (2022).
[4] S. Yuan, C. Ma, E. Fetaya, T. Mueller, D. Naveh, F. Zhang, and F. Xia, Geometric deep optical sensing. Science 379,
eade1220 (2023).
[5] Z. Wang, Y. Peng, L. Fang, and L. Gao, Computational optical imaging: on the convergence of physical and digital layers.
Optica 12, 113–130 (2025).
[6] H. Pinkard, L. Kabuli, E. Markley, T. Chien, J. Jiao, and L. Waller, Information-driven design of imaging systems. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.20559 (2024).
[7] V. Sitzmann, S. Diamond, Y. Peng, X. Dun, S. Boyd, W. Heidrich, F. Heide, and G. Wetzstein, End-to-end optimization
of optics and image processing for achromatic extended depth of field and super-resolution imaging. ACM Transactions
on Graphics (TOG) 37, 1–13 (2018).
[8] C. A. Metzler, H. Ikoma, Y. Peng, and G. Wetzstein, Deep optics for single-shot high-dynamic-range imaging. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 1375–1385 (2020).
[9] E. Tseng, S. Colburn, J. Whitehead, L. Huang, S.-H. Baek, A. Majumdar, and F. Heide, Neural nano-optics for high-
quality thin lens imaging. Nature Communications 12, 6493 (2021).
[10] J. Li, D. Mengu, N. T. Yardimci, Y. Luo, X. Li, M. Veli, Y. Rivenson, M. Jarrahi, and A. Ozcan, Spectrally encoded
single-pixel machine vision using diffractive networks. Science Advances 7, eabd7690 (2021).
[11] H. Zheng, Q. Liu, Y. Zhou, I. I. Kravchenko, Y. Huo, and J. Valentine, Meta-optic accelerators for object classifiers.
Science Advances 8, eabo6410 (2022).
[12] J. N. Martel, L. K. Mueller, S. J. Carey, P. Dudek, and G. Wetzstein, Neural sensors: Learning pixel exposures for HDR
imaging and video compressive sensing with programmable sensors. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
intelligence 42, 1642–1653 (2020).
[13] L. Mennel, J. Symonowicz, S. Wachter, D. K. Polyushkin, A. J. Molina-Mendoza, and T. Mueller, Ultrafast machine
vision with 2D material neural network image sensors. Nature 579, 62–66 (2020).
[14] P. Pad, S. Narduzzi, C. Kundig, E. Turetken, S. A. Bigdeli, and L. A. Dunbar, Efficient neural vision systems based on con-
volutional image acquisition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
12285–12294 (2020).
[15] T. Wang, M. M. Sohoni, L. G. Wright, M. M. Stein, S.-Y. Ma, T. Onodera, M. G. Anderson, and P. L. McMahon, Image
sensing with multilayer nonlinear optical neural networks. Nature Photonics 17, 408–415 (2023).
[16] T. Zhang, X. Guo, P. Wang, X. Fan, Z. Wang, Y. Tong, D. Wang, L. Tong, and L. Li, High performance artificial visual
perception and recognition with a plasmon-enhanced 2D material neural network. Nature Communications 15, 2471
(2024).
[17] H. Wang, B. Sun, S. S. Ge, J. Su, and M. L. Jin, On non-von Neumann flexible neuromorphic vision sensors. npj Flexible
Electronics 8, 28 (2024).
[18] M. Choi and A. Majumdar, Free-space optical encoder for computer vision. npj Nanophotonics 2, 36 (2025).
[19] R. Dixit and R. Cyr, Cell damage and reactive oxygen species production induced by fluorescence microscopy: effect on
mitosis and guidelines for non-invasive fluorescence microscopy. The Plant Journal 36, 280–290 (2003).
[20] T. Bernas, M. Zarebski, R. Cook, and J. Dobrucki, Minimizing photobleaching during confocal microscopy of fluorescent
probes bound to chromatin: role of anoxia and photon flux. Journal of Microscopy 215, 281–296 (2004).
[21] J. W. Lichtman and J.-A. Conchello, Fluorescence microscopy. Nature Methods 2, 910–919 (2005).
15
[22] K. Sulimany, S. K. Vadlamani, R. Hamerly, P. Iyengar, and D. Englund, Quantum-secure multiparty deep learning.
Physical Review X 15, 041056 (2025).
[23] F. Heide, M. B. Hullin, J. Gregson, and W. Heidrich, Low-budget transient imaging using photonic mixer devices. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 32, 1–10 (2013).
[24] A. Adan, G. Alizada, Y. Kiraz, Y. Baran, and A. Nalbant, Flow cytometry: basic principles and applications. Critical
reviews in biotechnology 37, 163–176 (2017).
[25] D. Schraivogel, T. M. Kuhn, B. Rauscher, M. Rodr´ıguez-Mart´ınez, M. Paulsen, K. Owsley, A. Middlebrook, C. Tischer,
B. Ramasz, D. Ordo˜nez-Rueda et al. High-speed fluorescence image–enabled cell sorting. Science 375, 315–320 (2022).
[26] M. N. Wernick and G. M. Morris, Image classification at low light levels. Journal of the Optical Society of America A 3,
2179–2187 (1986).
[27] G. M. Morris, T. A. Isberg, and M. N. Wernick, Pattern recognition using photon-limited images. In Real-Time Signal
Processing for Industrial Applications Vol. 960, 86 (1989).
[28] L. A. Saaf and G. M. Morris, Photon-limited image classification with a feedforward neural network. Applied Optics 34,
3963–3970 (1995).
[29] B. Chen and P. Perona, Seeing into darkness: Scotopic visual recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 3826–3835 (2017).
[30] C. Li, X. Qu, A. Gnanasambandam, O. A. Elgendy, J. Ma, and S. H. Chan, Photon-limited object detection using
non-local feature matching and knowledge distillation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, 3976–3987 (2021).
[31] B. Goyal and M. Gupta, Photon-starved scene inference using single photon cameras. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2512–2521 (2021).
[32] P. A. Morris, R. S. Aspden, J. E. Bell, R. W. Boyd, and M. J. Padgett, Imaging with a small number of photons. Nature
Communications 6, 5913 (2015).
[33] Q. Zhuang, Z. Zhang, and J. H. Shapiro, Distributed quantum sensing using continuous-variable multipartite entangle-
ment. Physical Review A 97, 032329 (2018).
[34] J. H. Shapiro, The quantum illumination story. IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine 35, 8–20 (2020).
[35] M. Erhard, M. Krenn, and A. Zeilinger, Advances in high-dimensional quantum entanglement. Nature Reviews Physics
2, 365–381 (2020).
[36] J. Qin, Y.-H. Deng, H.-S. Zhong, L.-C. Peng, H. Su, Y.-H. Luo, J.-M. Xu, D. Wu, S.-Q. Gong, H.-L. Liu et al. Unconditional
and robust quantum metrological advantage beyond N00N states. Physical Review Letters 130, 070801 (2023).
[37] Y. Xia, A. R. Agrawal, C. M. Pluchar, A. J. Brady, Z. Liu, Q. Zhuang, D. J. Wilson, and Z. Zhang, Entanglement-enhanced
optomechanical sensing. Nature Photonics 17, 470–477 (2023).
[38] H. Defienne, W. P. Bowen, M. Chekhova, G. B. Lemos, D. Oron, S. Ramelow, N. Treps, and D. Faccio, Advances in
quantum imaging. Nature Photonics 18, 1024–1036 (2024).
[39] N. Yu and F. Capasso, Flat optics with designer metasurfaces. Nature Materials 13, 139–150 (2014).
[40] M. Long, P. Wang, H. Fang, and W. Hu, Progress, challenges, and opportunities for 2D material based photodetectors.
Advanced Functional Materials 29, 1803807 (2019).
[41] J. Wu, Y. Guo, C. Deng, A. Zhang, H. Qiao, Z. Lu, J. Xie, L. Fang, and Q. Dai, An integrated imaging sensor for
aberration-corrected 3D photography. Nature 612, 62–71 (2022).
[42] C. Ma, S. Yuan, P. Cheung, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, F. Zhang, and F. Xia, Intelligent infrared sensing enabled by
tunable moir´e quantum geometry. Nature 604, 266–272 (2022).
[43] C. Roques-Carmes, Y. Salamin, J. Sloan, S. Choi, G. Velez, E. Koskas, N. Rivera, S. E. Kooi, J. D. Joannopoulos, and
M. Soljaˇci´c, Biasing the quantum vacuum to control macroscopic probability distributions. Science 381, 205–209 (2023).
[44] H. Shi, Z. Chen, S. E. Fraser, M. Yu, Z. Zhang, and Q. Zhuang, Entanglement-enhanced dual-comb spectroscopy. npj
Quantum Information 9, 91 (2023).
[45] J. Chang, V. Sitzmann, X. Dun, W. Heidrich, and G. Wetzstein, Hybrid optical-electronic convolutional neural networks
with optimized diffractive optics for image classification. Scientific Reports 8, 1–10 (2018).
[46] L. Bernstein, A. Sludds, C. Panuski, S. Trajtenberg-Mills, R. Hamerly, and D. Englund, Single-shot optical neural network.
Science Advances 9, eadg7904 (2023).
[47] Y. Chen, M. Nazhamaiti, H. Xu, Y. Meng, T. Zhou, G. Li, J. Fan, Q. Wei, J. Wu, F. Qiao et al. All-analog photoelectronic
chip for high-speed vision tasks. Nature 623, 48–57 (2023).
[48] D. F. Specht, Probabilistic neural networks. Neural Networks 3, 109–118 (1990).
[49] C. Tang and R. R. Salakhutdinov, Learning stochastic feedforward neural networks. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 26 (2013).
[50] J. W. Peters and M. Welling, Probabilistic binary neural networks. arXiv:1809.03368 (2018).
[51] S.-Y. Ma, T. Wang, J. Laydevant, L. G. Wright, and P. L. McMahon, Quantum-limited stochastic optical neural networks
operating at a few quanta per activation. Nature Communications 16, 359 (2025).
[52] Y. Bengio, N. L´eonard, and A. Courville, Estimating or propagating gradients through stochastic neurons for conditional
computation. arXiv:1308.3432 (2013).
[53] I. Hubara, M. Courbariaux, D. Soudry, R. El-Yaniv, and Y. Bengio, Binarized neural networks. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 29 (2016).
[54] L. Van der Maaten and G. Hinton, Visualizing data using t-SNE. Journal of Machine Learning Research 9 (2008).
[55] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, (2012) Elements of Information Theory. (John Wiley & Sons).
16
[56] S. Mika, G. Ratsch, J. Weston, B. Scholkopf, and K.-R. Mullers, Fisher discriminant analysis with kernels. In Neural
networks for signal processing IX: Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE signal processing society workshop (cat. no. 98th8468),
41–48 (1999).
[57] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 25 (2012).
[58] R. Hamerly, L. Bernstein, A. Sludds, M. Soljaˇci´c, and D. Englund, Large-scale optical neural networks based on photo-
electric multiplication. Physical Review X 9, 021032 (2019).
[59] A. Sludds, S. Bandyopadhyay, Z. Chen, Z. Zhong, J. Cochrane, L. Bernstein, D. Bunandar, P. B. Dixon, S. A. Hamilton,
M. Streshinsky et al. Delocalized photonic deep learning on the internet’s edge. Science 378, 270–276 (2022).
[60] T. Wang, S.-Y. Ma, L. G. Wright, T. Onodera, B. C. Richard, and P. L. McMahon, An optical neural network using less
than 1 photon per multiplication. Nature Communications 13, 1–8 (2022).
[61] D. Takhar, J. N. Laska, M. B. Wakin, M. F. Duarte, D. Baron, S. Sarvotham, K. F. Kelly, and R. G. Baraniuk, A
new compressive imaging camera architecture using optical-domain compression. In Computational Imaging IV Vol. 6065,
43–52 (2006).
[62] M. F. Duarte, M. A. Davenport, D. Takhar, J. N. Laska, T. Sun, K. F. Kelly, and R. G. Baraniuk, Single-pixel imaging
via compressive sampling. IEEE signal processing magazine 25, 83–91 (2008).
[63] H. Gao, B. Cheng, J. Wang, K. Li, J. Zhao, and D. Li, Object classification using CNN-based fusion of vision and LIDAR
in autonomous vehicle environment. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 14, 4224–4231 (2018).
[64] K. Lim, P. Treitz, M. Wulder, B. St-Onge, and M. Flood, LiDAR remote sensing of forest structure. Progress in physical
geography 27, 88–106 (2003).
[65] S. Winkelbach and F. M. Wahl, Shape from single stripe pattern illumination. In Joint Pattern Recognition Symposium,
240–247 (2002).
[66] W. Shi, X. Li, and H. Ma, Fluorescent probes and nanoparticles for intracellular sensing of pH values. Methods and
Applications in Fluorescence 2, 042001 (2014).
[67] O. Liba, M. D. Lew, E. D. SoRelle, R. Dutta, D. Sen, D. M. Moshfeghi, S. Chu, and A. de La Zerda, Speckle-modulating
optical coherence tomography in living mice and humans. Nature Communications 8, 15845 (2017).
[68] A. Jin, B. Yazıcı, and V. Ntziachristos, Light illumination and detection patterns for fluorescence diffuse optical tomog-
raphy based on compressive sensing. IEEE transactions on image processing 23, 2609–2624 (2014).
[69] L. Tian, Z. Liu, L.-H. Yeh, M. Chen, J. Zhong, and L. Waller, Computational illumination for high-speed in vitro Fourier
ptychographic microscopy. Optica 2, 904–911 (2015).
[70] R. Horstmeyer, R. Y. Chen, B. Kappes, and B. Judkewitz, Convolutional neural networks that teach microscopes how to
image. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.07223 (2017).
[71] M. R. Kellman, E. Bostan, N. A. Repina, and L. Waller, Physics-based learned design: optimized coded-illumination for
quantitative phase imaging. IEEE Transactions on Computational Imaging 5, 344–353 (2019).
[72] Z. Zhang, X. Li, S. Zheng, M. Yao, G. Zheng, and J. Zhong, Image-free classification of fast-moving objects using “learned”
structured illumination and single-pixel detection. Optics Express 28, 13269–13278 (2020).
[73] J. Bacca, T. Gelvez-Barrera, and H. Arguello, Deep coded aperture design: An end-to-end approach for computational
imaging tasks. IEEE Transactions on Computational Imaging 7, 1148–1160 (2021).
[74] U. Hohenester, F. Hitzelhammer, G. Krainer, P. Banzer, and T. Juffmann, Optimizing the localization precision in
coherent scattering microscopy using structured light. Nanophotonics 14, 4351–4364 (2025).
[75] H. Xiao, K. Rasul, and R. Vollgraf, Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmarking machine learning algorithms.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747 (2017).
[76] F. Xia, K. Kim, Y. Eliezer, S. Han, L. Shaughnessy, S. Gigan, and H. Cao, Nonlinear optical encoding enabled by recurrent
linear scattering. Nature Photonics 18, 1067–1075 (2024).
[77] L. G. Wright, T. Onodera, M. M. Stein, T. Wang, D. T. Schachter, Z. Hu, and P. L. McMahon, Deep physical neural
networks trained with backpropagation. Nature 601, 549–555 (2022).
[78] F. Presutti, L. G. Wright, S.-Y. Ma, T. Wang, B. K. Malia, T. Onodera, and P. L. McMahon, Highly multi-
mode visible squeezed light with programmable spectral correlations through broadband up-conversion. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.06119 (2024).
[79] R. H. Hadfield, Single-photon detectors for optical quantum information applications.
Nature Photonics 3, 696–705
(2009).
[80] G. Wetzstein, A. Ozcan, S. Gigan, S. Fan, D. Englund, M. Soljaˇci´c, C. Denz, D. A. Miller, and D. Psaltis, Inference in
artificial intelligence with deep optics and photonics. Nature 588, 39–47 (2020).
[81] X. Lin, Y. Rivenson, N. T. Yardimci, M. Veli, Y. Luo, M. Jarrahi, and A. Ozcan, All-optical machine learning using
diffractive deep neural networks. Science 361, 1004–1008 (2018).
[82] S. Gigan, Imaging and computing with disorder. Nature Physics 18, 980–985 (2022).
[83] J. Spall, X. Guo, T. D. Barrett, and A. Lvovsky, Fully reconfigurable coherent optical vector–matrix multiplication.
Optics Letters 45, 5752–5755 (2020).
[84] H. Wang, J. Hu, A. Morandi, A. Nardi, F. Xia, X. Li, R. Savo, Q. Liu, R. Grange, and S. Gigan, Large-scale photonic
computing with nonlinear disordered media. Nature Computational Science 4, 429–439 (2024).
[85] M. Reck, A. Zeilinger, H. J. Bernstein, and P. Bertani, Experimental realization of any discrete unitary operator. Physical
Review Letters 73, 58 (1994).
[86] Y. Shen, N. C. Harris, S. Skirlo, M. Prabhu, T. Baehr-Jones, M. Hochberg, X. Sun, S. Zhao, H. Larochelle, D. Englund
et al. Deep learning with coherent nanophotonic circuits. Nature Photonics 11, 441 (2017).
17
[87] S. Bandyopadhyay, A. Sludds, S. Krastanov, R. Hamerly, N. Harris, D. Bunandar, M. Streshinsky, M. Hochberg, and
D. Englund, Single-chip photonic deep neural network with forward-only training.
Nature Photonics 18, 1335–1343
(2024).
[88] S. M. Popoff, G. Lerosey, M. Fink, A. C. Boccara, and S. Gigan, Controlling light through optical disordered media:
transmission matrix approach. New Journal of Physics 13, 123021 (2011).
[89] M. S. S. Rahman, X. Yang, J. Li, B. Bai, and A. Ozcan, Universal linear intensity transformations using spatially
incoherent diffractive processors. Light: Science & Applications 12, 195 (2023).
[90] H. Cao, A. P. Mosk, and S. Rotter, Shaping the propagation of light in complex media. Nature Physics 18, 994–1007
(2022).
[91] H. Yu, Z. Huang, S. Lamon, B. Wang, H. Ding, J. Lin, Q. Wang, H. Luan, M. Gu, and Q. Zhang, All-optical image
transportation through a multimode fibre using a miniaturized diffractive neural network on the distal facet. Nature
Photonics pp. 1–8 (2025).
[92] D. A. Boas and A. K. Dunn, Laser speckle contrast imaging in biomedical optics. Journal of Biomedical Optics 15,
011109–011109 (2010).
[93] A. Konovalov, V. Gadzhiagaev, F. Grebenev, D. Stavtsev, G. Piavchenko, A. Gerasimenko, D. Telyshev, I. Meglinski, and
S. Eliava, Laser speckle contrast imaging in neurosurgery: a systematic review. World Neurosurgery 171, 35–40 (2023).
[94] M. Arnaboldi, K. Freeman, S. Okamura, N. Yasuda, O. Gerhard, N. R. Napolitano, M. Pannella, H. Ando, M. Doi,
H. Furusawa et al. Narrowband Imaging in [O III] and Hα to Search forIntracluster Planetary Nebulae in the VirgoCluster.
The Astronomical Journal 125, 514 (2003).
[95] R. Galera-Rosillo, R. Corradi, and A. Mampaso, A deep narrowband survey for planetary nebulae at the outskirts of M
33. Astronomy & Astrophysics 612, A35 (2018).
[96] M. A. Neifeld, A. Ashok, and P. K. Baheti, Task-specific information for imaging system analysis. Journal of the Optical
Society of America A 24, B25–B41 (2007).
[97] A. Kirmani, D. Venkatraman, D. Shin, A. Cola¸co, F. N. Wong, J. H. Shapiro, and V. K. Goyal, First-photon imaging.
Science 343, 58–61 (2014).
[98] A. Gnanasambandam and S. H. Chan, Image classification in the dark using quanta image sensors. In European Conference
on Computer Vision, 484–501 (2020).
[99] J. B¨utow, J. S. Eismann, V. Sharma, D. Brandm¨uller, and P. Banzer, Generating free-space structured light with pro-
grammable integrated photonics. Nature Photonics 18, 243–249 (2024).
[100] M. Mansouree, H. Kwon, E. Arbabi, A. McClung, A. Faraon, and A. Arbabi, Multifunctional 2.5 D metastructures
enabled by adjoint optimization. Optica 7, 77–84 (2020).
[101] S. Lee, C. Park, and J. Rho, Mapping information and light: trends of AI-enabled metaphotonics. Current Opinion in
Solid State and Materials Science 29, 101144 (2024).
[102] L. Huang, Q. A. Tanguy, J. E. Fr¨och, S. Mukherjee, K. F. B¨ohringer, and A. Majumdar, Photonic advantage of optical
encoders. Nanophotonics 13, 1191–1196 (2024).
[103] J. Hu, D. Mengu, D. C. Tzarouchis, B. Edwards, N. Engheta, and A. Ozcan, Diffractive optical computing in free space.
Nature Communications 15, 1525 (2024).
[104] E. J. Candes and T. Tao, Near-optimal signal recovery from random projections: Universal encoding strategies? IEEE
transactions on information theory 52, 5406–5425 (2006).
[105] Y. Zhu, J. Shi, X. Wu, X. Liu, G. Zeng, J. Sun, L. Tian, and F. Su, Photon-limited non-imaging object detection and
classification based on single-pixel imaging system. Applied Physics B 126, 21 (2020).
[106] Z. Huang, W. Shi, S. Wu, Y. Wang, S. Yang, and H. Chen, Pre-sensor computing with compact multilayer optical neural
network. Science Advances 10, eado8516 (2024).
[107] C. W. Helstrom, Quantum detection and estimation theory. Journal of Statistical Physics 1, 231–252 (1969).
[108] M. Yildirim, N. U. Dinc, I. Oguz, D. Psaltis, and C. Moser, Nonlinear processing with linear optics. Nature Photonics
18, 1076–1082 (2024).
[109] C. C. Wanjura and F. Marquardt, Fully nonlinear neuromorphic computing with linear wave scattering. Nature Physics
20, 1434–1440 (2024).
[110] Y. Li, J. Li, and A. Ozcan, Nonlinear encoding in diffractive information processing using linear optical materials. Light:
Science & Applications 13, 173 (2024).
[111] J. Zhang, M. A. Itzler, H. Zbinden, and J.-W. Pan, Advances in InGaAs/InP single-photon detector systems for quantum
communication. Light: Science & Applications 4, e286–e286 (2015).
[112] Z. Zhang, S. Mouradian, F. N. Wong, and J. H. Shapiro, Entanglement-enhanced sensing in a lossy and noisy environment.
Physical Review Letters 114, 110506 (2015).
[113] J. Grollier, D. Querlioz, K. Camsari, K. Everschor-Sitte, S. Fukami, and M. D. Stiles, Neuromorphic spintronics. Nature
electronics 3, 360–370 (2020).
[114] A. N. Islam, K. Yang, A. K. Shukla, P. Khanal, B. Zhou, W.-G. Wang, and A. Sengupta, Hardware in loop learning with
spin stochastic neurons. Advanced Intelligent Systems 6, 2300805 (2024).
[115] H. Yeon, P. Lin, C. Choi, S. H. Tan, Y. Park, D. Lee, J. Lee, F. Xu, B. Gao, H. Wu et al. Alloying conducting channels
for reliable neuromorphic computing. Nature Nanotechnology 15, 574–579 (2020).
[116] X. Yao, K. Klyukin, W. Lu, M. Onen, S. Ryu, D. Kim, N. Emond, I. Waluyo, A. Hunt, J. A. Del Alamo et al. Protonic
solid-state electrochemical synapse for physical neural networks. Nature Communications 11, 3134 (2020).
[117] G. Agarwal and L. Davidovich, Quantifying quantum-amplified metrology via Fisher information. Physical Review Re-
search 4, L012014 (2022).
18
[118] S. Mukamel, M. Freyberger, W. Schleich, M. Bellini, A. Zavatta, G. Leuchs, C. Silberhorn, R. W. Boyd, L. L. S´anchez-
Soto, A. Stefanov et al. Roadmap on quantum light spectroscopy. Journal of physics B: Atomic, molecular and optical
physics 53, 072002 (2020).
[119] Y. Huo, H. Bao, Y. Peng, C. Gao, W. Hua, Q. Yang, H. Li, R. Wang, and S.-E. Yoon, Optical neural network via loose
neuron array and functional learning. Nature Communications 14, 2535 (2023).
[120] A. Momeni, B. Rahmani, M. Mall´ejac, P. Del Hougne, and R. Fleury, Backpropagation-free training of deep physical
neural networks. Science 382, 1297–1303 (2023).
[121] P. R´efr´egier and F. Galland, Bhattacharyya bound for Raman spectrum classification with a couple of binary filters.
Optics Letters 44, 2228–2231 (2019).
[122] Q. Zhuang and Z. Zhang, Physical-layer supervised learning assisted by an entangled sensor network. Physical Review X
9, 041023 (2019).
[123] Y. Ding and A. Ashok, Bounds on mutual information of mixture data for classification tasks. Journal of the Optical
Society of America A 39, 1160–1171 (2022).
Appendices for
Machine vision with small numbers of detected photons per inference
Shi-Yuan Ma,1, ∗J´er´emie Laydevant,1 Mandar M. Sohoni,1
Logan G. Wright,1, 2, † Tianyu Wang,1, ‡ and Peter L. McMahon1, §
1School of Applied and Engineering Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
2NTT Physics and Informatics Laboratories, NTT Research, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA 94085, USA
CONTENTS
I
Framework
1
Appendix 1. Photon-aware neuromorphic sensing framework
1
A. Modeling of single-photon detection
1
B. Gradient estimation through stochastic neurons
2
C. Training methods
3
D. Inference procedure
5
E. The optical front end and the detection bottleneck
5
Appendix 2. Sensing paradigms and algorithmic approaches
7
A. General framework for optical sensing
7
B. The detection bottleneck
8
C. A taxonomy of sensing approaches
8
D. Summary of sensing paradigms
10
Appendix 3. Active PANS with structured illumination
12
A. Optical encoding via structured illumination
12
B. Non-negativity constraint and squared parameterization
13
C. Photon budget control
14
D. Training procedure
15
Appendix 4. Passive PANS with linear optical processors
16
A. Optical encoding via field transformation
16
B. Intensity-based encoding
17
C. Training procedure
18
∗sm2725@cornell.edu; mashiyua@mit.edu; Present address: Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
† Present address: Department of Applied Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA
‡ Present address: Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
§ pmcmahon@cornell.edu
2
Appendix 5. Photon budget scaling
20
A. Detected photons Ndet
20
B. Scaling average photon level
20
C. K-shot scaling
21
D. Feature dimension (df) scaling
22
E. Summary of scaling methods
22
F. Reporting Ndet and performance variability
23
II
Numerical simulation details
25
Appendix 6. Training PANS models
25
A. Model architecture
25
B. Training procedure
28
C. Choice of digital back-end architecture
29
D. Illumination regularization and the accuracy–photon tradeoff
29
E. Effect of regularization on learned patterns
34
Appendix 7. Testing trained PANS models
37
A. Multi-shot (K > 1) evaluation
37
B. Photon level scaling (η)
38
C. Dark count rate (DCR)
39
Appendix 8. Paradigm comparison in numerical simulation
41
A. Direct imaging
41
B. Fixed optical transformations
45
C. Conventional end-to-end optimization
47
D. Summary
48
Appendix 9. Active PANS: Additional tasks
49
A. MNIST digit classification
49
B. Cell-organelle classification
49
C. Barcode “1010” identification
51
Appendix 10. Passive PANS: Diverse sensing applications
53
A. MNIST through multimode fiber: classification and reconstruction
53
B. Transient event detection
55
C. Tissue blood flow detection
55
D. Compact nebula classification
58
E. Fiber end-face inspection
58
F. Summary and outlook
58
3
III
Experimental implementation
62
Appendix 11. Structured illumination platform
62
A. System overview
62
B. Programmable illumination source
62
C. Object plane and intensity modulation
62
D. Single-photon detection
63
Appendix 12. Implementation of active PANS
65
A. Normalization and parameter mapping
65
B. Photon level calibration
65
C. Spatial configuration
65
D. Detector configuration
66
E. Measurement protocol
66
Appendix 13. Evaluation of experimental results
66
A. Visualization of collected SPD readouts
66
B. From feature vectors to classification
68
C. Output distribution across trials
68
D. Confusion matrices
71
E. K-shot integration
71
F. Comparison to simulation
71
G. Summary
75
References
75
1
Part I:
Framework
Appendix 1.
PHOTON-AWARE NEUROMORPHIC SENSING FRAMEWORK
This section presents the photon-aware neuromorphic sensing (PANS) framework. The central idea is to explicitly
model the stochastic single-photon detection (SPD) process during training, enabling end-to-end optimization through
the detection bottleneck in the few-photon regime.
A.
Modeling of single-photon detection
The SPD process in a PANS model is modeled as a binary probabilistic neuron [1, 2], corresponding physically to a
single readout from a photon detector. For each measurement, the single-shot output is either 0 or 1, with probabilities
determined by the incident optical energy. The activation function takes its form directly from the physics of photon
detection. We focus on Poissonian statistics, which govern photon arrivals for classical light sources, though the
PANS framework generalizes to other detection statistics [3–6]. In practice, we found the actual form of the statistic
expression does not affect the realistic numerical simulation significantly.
Derivation from Poisson statistics
Consider a detector illuminated by classical light with expected photon number λ representing the mean photon
flux integrated over the measurement window. Assuming photon arrivals follow Poisson statistics:
P(n | λ) = λne−λ
n!
,
(1)
where n is the number of detected photons.
In the single-shot SPD regime, each detector makes a binary measurement: either at least one photon is detected
(a = 1) or no photons are detected (a = 0). The probability of detecting a click is:
PSPD(λ) = P(a = 1 | λ) = 1 −P(n = 0 | λ) = 1 −e−λ.
(2)
The SPD activation can thus be regarded as a Bernoulli random variable:
a(λ) = 1t<PSPD(λ),
(3)
where t ∼Uniform[0, 1] and 1{·} is the indicator function.
2
Relationship between λ and trainable parameters
The expected photon number λ on the optical front end and the chosen configuration. Two common examples are:
• Intensity encoding: λ = [⃗w⊤⃗x]+, where ⃗w represents optical weights and ⃗x is the input signal (with [·]+
enforcing non-negativity).
• Field-amplitude encoding: λ =
⃗w⊤⃗E

2
, where ⃗E is the input field amplitude and ⃗w represents a linear
optical transformation.
PANS is agnostic to the specific optical front end form; it requires only that the trainable parameters in the optical
front end can be effectively optimized.
B.
Gradient estimation through stochastic neurons
The discrete, stochastic nature of single-photon detection poses a challenge for gradient-based optimization. The
sampling operation a(λ) = 1t<PSPD(λ) is non-differentiable, precluding standard backpropagation.
We employ a straight-through estimator (STE) [7–9], a technique proven effective for training networks with discrete
activations. The standard STE would set ∂a/∂λ = 1, passing gradients through the non-differentiable operation
unchanged (“straight-through”). However, this approach does not perform efficiently with the actual SPD process.
Instead, we incorporate a damping factor e−λ that modulates the gradient during backpropagation. The gradient of
the loss L with respect to λ is estimated as:
∂L
∂λ = ∂L
∂a · ∂a
∂λ ≈∂L
∂a · e−λ.
(4)
The factor e−λ naturally implements adaptive gradient scaling: gradients flow freely in the low-flux regime where
detection is informative, and are naturally suppressed when detection probability saturates.
In practice, the precise form of the damping function matters less than its qualitative behavior: any function
that vanishes for large λ effectively regularizes against excessive photon counts. However, choosing e−λ specifically
has a notable effect. Since e−λ is also the derivative ∂PSPD(λ)/∂λ and that PSPD is the expectation value of a,
PSPD(λ) = E[a], our estimator becomes unbiased:
∂L
∂a · e−λ = ∂L
∂a · ∂PSPD(λ)
∂λ
= ∂L
∂a · ∂E[a]
∂λ .
(5)
That is, the estimated gradient equals the true gradient of the loss with respect to the expected activation, providing
an unbiased signal for optimization. While unbiasedness is not essential for effective training, this correspondence
provides a satisfying theoretical grounding, and we adopt this form throughout.
The STE decouples the forward and backward passes:
• Forward pass: Sample a using the true stochastic process.
• Backward pass: Propagate gradients through the deterministic function PSPD.
3
This approach connects the physical front end and digital back end despite the highly stochastic detection process.
Given the gradient with respect to activation, ga = ∂L/∂a, computed via backpropagation through the digital network,
we obtain the gradient with respect to expected photon number as gλ = e−λ · ga. Gradients with respect to optical
front-end parameters (e.g., weight matrix W) then follows from the chain rule applied to the specific encoding scheme.
Properties and implications in the few-photon regime
The detection probability PSPD(λ) = 1 −e−λ saturates as λ →∞, with derivative P ′
SPD(λ) = e−λ that decays
exponentially. In the high-flux regime (λ ≫1), the detection probability approaches unity and becomes insensitive
to changes in λ. In contrast, in the few-photon regime (λ ∼1), the measurement is intrinsically discrete and strongly
non-deterministic.
From an information-theoretic perspective, the binary entropy of a is maximized when PSPD(λ) = 0.5, correspond-
ing to λ = ln 2 ≈0.69 photons.
Although task-specific losses do not reduce to maximizing per-neuron entropy,
this observation provides intuition: operating near λ ∼1 balances informative activations against well-conditioned
gradients.
C.
Training methods
Training jointly optimizes the optical front end and digital back end using gradient-based methods, with our cus-
tomized STE providing gradient estimates through the stochastic detection layer. Encoding-specific details, including
loss functions and implementation considerations, are described in Appendix 3 and Appendix 4. Here we discuss
training techniques common to all PANS implementations.
Initialization strategy
Proper initialization is crucial for training stochastic physical models. If initial weights produce expected photon
counts λ that are too large, the detection probability saturates (PSPD ≈1) and gradients vanish (P ′
SPD(λ) = e−λ ≈0),
preventing effective learning. Conversely, if initial λ values are too small, the activations are nearly always zero,
providing weak learning signals.
We employ Kaiming uniform initialization [10] with a modified scaling factor. Standard Kaiming initialization
includes a parameter controlling weight magnitude; we adjust this to ensure initial λ values fall in the range where
gradients are well-conditioned The specific choice of a depends on the encoding scheme and is detailed in subsequent
sections. This initialization strategy ensures training begins in a regime where the stochastic detection process provides
informative gradients.
4
Slope annealing and intensity clamping
To further enhance training effectiveness, we introduce a slope parameter η that modifies the effective intensity
within the SPD activation function:
P η
SPD(λ) = PSPD(ηλ) = 1 −e−ηλ.
(6)
The slope annealing technique [11] enables controlled alteration of the gradients, facilitating more efficient navigation
of the parameter space.
The slope is updated after each epoch by a multiplicative factor θ: η ←θη.
In the
optical implementation, the annealing factor can be absorbed into the mapping from trained weights to experimental
parameters.
We can also clamp intensities to a maximum value λmax:
λclamp = min(λ, λmax).
(7)
This prevents vanishing gradients resulting from excessively large intensity values where the probability function
plateaus. Both slope annealing and intensity clamping are applied during training only.
Batch normalization after detection
We employ batch normalization on the df-dimensional feature vector immediately after the detection stage. This
choice is enabled precisely because we are operating in the digital domain after the bottleneck, where such transfor-
mations are computationally trivial. Batch normalization serves several important functions:
• Stabilization: The raw detection outputs exhibit significant variance due to photon shot noise, particularly at
low photon counts. Normalization stabilizes the distribution of activations across training batches, improving
optimization dynamics.
• Scale invariance: Normalization provides implicit regularization by making the network invariant to the absolute
scale of photon counts. This is valuable when testing across different photon budgets than those used during
training.
• Adaptation: The learned affine parameters of batch normalization allow the network to adapt the feature
distribution to the optimal range for subsequent layers.
• Gradient flow: Normalized activations help maintain healthy gradient magnitudes throughout training, prevent-
ing vanishing or exploding gradients in the digital back end.
Notably, batch normalization cannot be implemented optically before detection—it requires computing statistics
over a batch of measurements and applying learned affine transformations, operations that have no simple optical
analog. This exemplifies a key design principle: digital processing should maximally exploit its flexibility to compen-
sate for constraints at the detection bottleneck. Once photons are converted to digital signals, the objective is simply
to extract information as effectively as possible.
5
D.
Inference procedure
During inference of a trained model, the forward pass is similar to training except that intensity clamping is not
applied. An effective scaling factor (slope) η is calibrated with the physical setup to map the trained parameters to
actual optical intensity in the setup. To reduce stochastic uncertainty, multiple detection shots can be averaged per
inference.
In K-shot inference, we use K independent binary SPD readouts and average them to obtain the activation:
a[K] = 1
K
K
X
k=1
a(k),
a(k) ∼Bernoulli(p).
(8)
This yields a[K] ∈{0, 1/K, 2/K, . . . , 1}. The process reduces uncertainty: Var[a[K]] = p(1 −p)/K. In the limit
K →∞, the activation converges to the expectation value without stochasticity: a[∞] = E[a] = PSPD(λ).
In practice, models trained with K = 1 generalize well to inference with larger K, achieving higher accuracy as K
increases. For the sensing applications presented in this work, we report results with K = 1 (single-shot inference)
to demonstrate performance under the most stringent photon constraints, where each detected photon contributes
maximally to the sensing task.
Algorithm 1 Inference of PANS
Require: Test input ⃗x, trainable encoder W, digital back-end model fθ, number of shots K, slope η
Ensure: Output prediction
1: ⃗λ ←Encode(W, ⃗x)
▷Mapping to ⃗λ depends on the encoding scheme
2: ⃗p ←1 −exp

−η · ⃗λ

▷Virtual probabilities based on input intensity
3: for k = 1 to K do
▷K shots per inference
4:
⃗a(k) ←Bernoulli(⃗p)
▷Single-shot SPD measurement
5: end for
6: ⃗a ←1
K
PK
k=1 ⃗a(k)
▷Average over K shots
7: return fθ(⃗a)
▷Digital back-end processing
E.
The optical front end and the detection bottleneck
In a general optical sensing system, the object of interest interacts with light, which carries the object’s information
to the detector. This analog optical signal is then converted to digital data and processed by algorithms to extract
insights.
Conceptually, this represents an encoder–decoder architecture: the physical optical system acts as an
“encoder” that determines how information is captured and packaged, and the digital system acts as a “decoder” that
processes the captured data to complete the sensing task. Critically, these two stages are separated by the detection
bottleneck—the physical process where analog optical signals are irreversibly converted to digital measurements.
When optical resources are abundant, the detection bottleneck poses little concern; high signal-to-noise ratios
ensure that most information survives the analog-to-digital transition. However, under photon-starved conditions,
this bottleneck becomes the critical limiting factor. The stochastic nature of photon detection means that information
is irreversibly lost at this stage—information that cannot be recovered by any subsequent digital processing, no matter
how sophisticated. This asymmetry between pre- and post-detection processing motivates the core principle of PANS:
6
optimize the optical front end to maximize information flow through the detection bottleneck.
The optical front end is the only configurable component before the lossy detection stage. Its role is to transform the
incoming optical signal into a representation that preserves task-relevant information as effectively as possible given
the photon budget constraints. Once detection occurs, the physical signal becomes digital data, and we can apply
arbitrarily powerful computational methods—but we are limited to working with whatever information has survived
the bottleneck. The encoder thus plays a decisive role, determining what information reaches the digital domain
Mathematically, we express the optical encoder as a parameterized mapping:
⃗λ = FW (⃗x),
(9)
where ⃗x denotes the object representation, W represents the trainable parameters of the optical system, and ⃗λ ∈Rdf
≥0
is the vector of expected photon numbers at each of the df detectors. The transformation FW encapsulates all optical
physics between the object and the detector array. Different encoder architectures correspond to different functional
forms of FW , but all share the same downstream pipeline: detection samples from ⃗λ to produce digital outputs,
followed by digital post-processing.
The key insight of PANS is that by faithfully modeling the detection process as it actually occurs—sampling from
the distribution defined by ⃗λ according to the photon statistics—we can optimize the encoder parameters W against
the true physical constraints at the bottleneck.
This photon-aware approach allows the system to learn optimal
allocation of its limited photon budget across feature dimensions, maximizing retention of task-relevant information.
Conventional end-to-end optimization methods, which do not explicitly model the non-deterministic detection process,
cannot achieve this because their optimization landscapes do not reflect the actual information loss that occurs under
the physical constraints of photon-limited detection.
This encoder-agnostic formulation reveals the broad applicability of the PANS framework. Any programmable
optical system—whether based on structured illumination, linear transformations, nonlinear dynamics, scattering
media, diffractive elements, or quantum states—can serve as the encoder FW , provided it can be modeled and
optimized. The specific encoders presented in Appendix 3 (active illumination) and Appendix 4 (passive light-field
transformation) represent particular instantiations chosen for their experimental accessibility and physical clarity.
As optical processing platforms continue to advance, this framework provides a principled foundation for optimizing
increasingly sophisticated architectures under extreme physical constraints where the detection bottleneck dominates
system performance.
7
Appendix 2.
SENSING PARADIGMS AND ALGORITHMIC APPROACHES
Before presenting specific implementations of active and passive PANS, we establish a general framework to situate
PANS among different algorithmic approaches to optical sensing, from direct imaging to conventional end-to-end
optimization. We first describe the general sensing pipeline without assuming any particular operating regime, then
discuss how the detection bottleneck—when it occurs—changes which approaches remain effective. This taxonomy
clarifies what distinguishes photon-aware methods and under what conditions they become essential.
A.
General framework for optical sensing
The physical object in optical sensing
Consider a physical object characterized by some spatially-varying optical property—transmission, reflectance,
fluorescence distribution, or similar. While such properties are fundamentally continuous, in practice we represent
them as a finite-dimensional vector ⃗x ∈Rdobj, where dobj denotes the number of elements used to describe the object.
This discretization is a modeling choice determined by the resolution of the system and computational considerations,
not an intrinsic property of the physical object itself.
This representation is standard in computer vision, where dobj typically corresponds to the number of spatial pixels.
More broadly, the dobj dimensions can represent frequency bins for polychromatic signals, time stamps for temporal
measurements, or other bases appropriate for the sensing modality. The framework thus provides a tractable finite-
dimensional description applicable across diverse optical sensing applications. The sensing task is then to extract
information about ⃗x—whether reconstructing it entirely, classifying it into categories, or estimating parameters of
interest.
The sensing pipeline
Any optical sensing system can be decomposed into three stages:
1. Optical front-end: Physical operations applied before detection that transform the object representation ⃗x into
optical signals at the detector plane. In active sensing, this includes the illumination that probes the object; in
passive sensing, it includes optical elements (lenses, diffractive components, spatial light modulators, scattering
media) that process incoming light. Mathematically, the optical front-end implements a mapping from the dobj-
dimensional object space to a df-dimensional detection space, producing expected optical intensities ⃗λ ∈Rdf
≥0 at
the df detector elements.
2. Detection: Conversion of optical signals to digital data. Sampling from the expected intensities ⃗λ, detec-
tors produce digital readouts for subsequent processing. When optical energy is sufficient, the detected values
faithfully reflect ⃗λ, and this stage introduces negligible distortion—the common situation in standard com-
puter vision applications. However, when optical energy is limited, detection becomes non-deterministic due to
photon statistics: outcomes occur in discrete units of photon energy, introducing uncertainty governed by the
measurement statistics of the light source.
8
3. Digital back-end: Computational processing that operates on the detected digital data to accomplish the sens-
ing task. This may range from simple algorithms to sophisticated neural networks, implementing classification,
regression, reconstruction, or other inference tasks.
B.
The detection bottleneck
When optical resources are abundant, detection functions as a reliable channel: the detected values accurately
represent the expected intensities ⃗λ, and information encoded in the optical signal passes through to the digital
domain with minimal loss. Standard cameras operating under typical illumination exemplify this regime, where the
detection stage poses no fundamental limitation.
However, when optical energy becomes severely limited (e.g. due to weak sources, short integration times, low
reflectivity, or the need to minimize optical exposure), detection can become the dominant source of information loss
in the sensing pipeline. In this regime, the stochastic and discrete nature of photon detection introduces substantial
uncertainty: measurements deviate significantly from their expected values, and outcomes become increasingly un-
predictable as expected photon counts per detection decrease. The detection process then acts as a lossy information
channel that discards a significant portion of the information encoded in ⃗λ.
We call this phenomenon the detection bottleneck. Its key characteristic is irreversibility: information lost during
detection cannot be recovered by any subsequent digital processing, regardless of its sophistication. This asymmetry
has a critical implication for system design—when the detection bottleneck is the limiting factor, optimization efforts
should focus primarily on the optical front-end, which is the only configurable component before the lossy detection
stage.
C.
A taxonomy of sensing approaches
We organize sensing approaches according to three decisions regarding the optical front-end:
Decision 1: Pre-detection optical transformation?
The first distinction is whether any optical transformation is applied before detection beyond simply imaging the
object onto the detector array. If not, the system performs direct imaging: each detector element corresponds
directly to a spatial location on the object, so that df = dobj and the mapping from ⃗x to ⃗λ is essentially an identity
(up to scaling). If yes, an optical transformation maps the object from its native dobj-dimensional space to a df-
dimensional feature space before detection, where typically df ̸= dobj.
Examples of such optical transformations span a wide range: spatial binning or downsampling, coded apertures,
structured illumination patterns used in compressive sensing, transmission through scattering media, and diffrac-
tive optical elements. The key point is that any pre-detection optical transformation fundamentally changes how
information is presented to the detectors.
9
NO
YES
NO
YES
NO
YES
Photon-aware
modeling?
Task-speciﬁc
optimization?
Pre-detection
operation?
Direct
imaging
Fixed optical
transformation
Conventional
end-to-end
PANS
End-to-end
optimization
Optical
encoding
Optical
sensing
Fig. A1. Taxonomy of optical sensing approaches. A flowchart illustrating the hierarchy of algorithmic
approaches in optical sensing. Starting from the top, if no pre-detection operation is applied, the system performs
direct imaging (blue). If an optical encoding operation is applied, the approach branches based on whether
task-specific training is used: fixed transformations (white) use predetermined configurations such as downsampling
or compressive sensing patterns, while end-to-end optimization learns task-specific optical parameters jointly with
the digital back-end. End-to-end methods further divide based on whether photon-aware modeling is employed:
conventional end-to-end methods (green) do not explicitly model stochastic photon detection, whereas photon-aware
neuromorphic sensing (PANS, red) faithfully represents the probabilistic, discrete nature of the detection process
during optimization. The color coding agrees with Fig. 2 in the main text. Shaded background regions group
approaches by the level of sophistication in the optical front-end design.
Decision 2: Task-specific optimization?
Given a pre-detection optical transformation, the second distinction is whether its parameters are optimized for the
specific sensing task. Fixed optical transformations use predetermined configurations—downsampling grids, ran-
dom projection matrices, or illumination patterns designed according to general principles (e.g., incoherence properties
in compressive sensing). These are selected without reference to the particular task or object distribution.
In contrast, learned transformations optimize the optical parameters jointly with the digital back-end to maximize
task performance. This end-to-end (E2E) optimization discovers task-specific transformations that may be far more
efficient than generic designs.
For classification, the learned transformation projects objects onto directions that
maximize class separability; for reconstruction, it preserves information most relevant to recovering the original
signal.
10
Decision 3: Photon-aware forward modeling?
Given learned optical transformations through E2E optimization, the third distinction concerns how the detection
process is modeled during optimization. In many applications—particularly in computer vision where detection is
reliable—conventional end-to-end methods work effectively. These typically model the forward pass as determin-
istic, incorporate additive noise, or employ robustness techniques such as quantization-aware training [12, 13]. Such
approximations are effective when detection introduces only minor perturbations to the optical signals.
However, when the detection bottleneck becomes significant—when detection is unreliable, highly non-deterministic,
and produces discrete outcomes—these approximations break down. Photon-aware methods address this by faith-
fully modeling the actual stochastic photon-detection process during optimization. Rather than treating detection as
deterministic-plus-noise, photon-aware methods represent detection as the inherently probabilistic process it physically
is, enabling optimization against the true physical constraints at the bottleneck.
D.
Summary of sensing paradigms
These three decisions yield four distinct stages of increasing sophistication:
1. Direct imaging: No pre-detection optical transformation. Detectors capture an image of the object directly,
with ⃗λ proportional to ⃗x (up to system response) and df = dobj. The digital back-end processes these direct
measurements.
2. Fixed optical transformation: A predetermined operation (e.g., downsampling, pixel binning, fixed coded
aperture, illumination patterns from compressive sensing) maps ⃗x to ⃗λ. The transformation is not optimized
for the task; only the digital back-end is trained.
3. Conventional (“non-photon-aware”, non-PA) E2E: The optical transformation parameters are optimized
jointly with the digital back-end through end-to-end training. The forward model does not explicitly represent
the non-deterministic nature of photon detection—it treats detection as deterministic or subject to approximate
noise models.
4. Photon-aware neuromorphic sensing (PANS): The optical transformation and digital back-end are jointly
optimized with a forward model that faithfully represents the stochastic photon-detection process. Training
explicitly accounts for the probabilistic, discrete nature of detection.
Table A1 summarizes these stages.
Table A1. Taxonomy of sensing approaches based on optical front-end design choices.
Approach
Optical operation Task-optimized Photon-aware
Direct imaging
×
—
—
Fixed optical transformation
✓
×
—
Conventional (non-PA) E2E
✓
✓
×
Photon-aware neuromorphic sensing (PANS)
✓
✓
✓
11
When detection is reliable and introduces negligible information loss—as in standard computer vision and many
optical sensing applications—direct imaging is often sufficient, assuming adequate detector availability. All approaches
can be effective in this regime, with the choice depending on practical considerations such as hardware constraints
and computational resources.
However, when optical energy at detection is severely limited, detection becomes unreliable and loses most infor-
mation. This motivates the search for more efficient information encoding at the detection bottleneck. Fixed optical
transformations may help by concentrating measurements into fewer dimensions, but cannot adapt to the task or to
the detection statistics. Conventional E2E methods optimize the optical transformation for specific tasks, but at a
few photons per detection, signals become highly non-deterministic and the learned parameters no longer apply.
Photon-aware methods address precisely this challenge. By modeling the stochastic detection process during train-
ing, PANS learns optical transformations that remain discriminative even when individual sampled measurements
are highly uncertain. The system learns to allocate its limited photon budget across feature dimensions to maxi-
mize retention of task-relevant information through the lossy detection channel, with respect to the actual physical
constraints imposed by photon statistics.
12
Appendix 3.
ACTIVE PANS WITH STRUCTURED ILLUMINATION
A.
Optical encoding via structured illumination
Active optical sensing involves designing illumination patterns that are projected onto an object to efficiently
extract task-relevant information. This strategy has been widely used in computational optics, with applications in
compressive sensing [14], LiDAR [15], and biomedical imaging [16, 17].
Physical setup
Consider an object characterized by a spatially-varying transmission (or reflection) profile ⃗x ∈[0, 1]dobj, where dobj
is the number of spatial modes (pixels) and each element xj represents the local transmission coefficient. A structured
illumination pattern with intensity profile ⃗w ∈Rdobj
≥0 is projected onto the object. The transmitted (or reflected) light
is collected by a bucket detector (single-photon counter), which integrates the total optical power without spatial
resolution.
Mathematical formulation
The expected photon count at the detector is proportional to the overlap between the illumination pattern and the
object transmission:
λ = ⃗w · ⃗x =
dobj
X
j=1
wjxj.
(10)
Here λ directly represents the expected number of photons reaching the detector, determined by the element-wise
product of the illumination intensity and object transmission, summed over all spatial modes.
By projecting df different illumination patterns {⃗w1, ⃗w2, . . . , ⃗wdf} onto the object, we obtain a df-dimensional feature
vector ⃗λ = (λ1, λ2, . . . , λdf). Collectively, these patterns define a linear transformation:
⃗λ = W⃗x,
W ∈Rdf×dobj
≥0
,
(11)
where each row of W corresponds to one illumination pattern. This linear transformation occurs before the detection
bottleneck, allowing the optical encoder to concentrate task-relevant information into a compact feature representation.
Compatibility with incoherent light
This scheme operates on the modulation and redistribution of light intensity, without requiring phase stability or
coherent interference. This makes active PANS fully compatible with spatially incoherent illumination sources, where
the optical intensity at each spatial mode can be controlled independently. While coherent light sources would also
work within this framework, the use of incoherent light offers significant practical advantages:
13
w
Light source
Object
image plane
Photon detector
Imaging
system
Optical 
fan-in
Σ
w  x
w  x
Illumination
pattern
w  x
Fig. A2. Diagram of the optical front end operation in active sensing. The light source provide a
spatially distributed illumination pattern and project to the object, the object then attentuate the illuminatino
light, equivalent to element-wise multiplication. then the optical energy was focused on to a detector to be
measured. the output is equivalent to a dot product process.
• Robustness: Incoherent systems are inherently immune to environmental perturbations such as vibrations,
thermal fluctuations, and air turbulence that would degrade coherent optical setups.
• Simplicity: The mathematical model (Eq. 10) directly describes the physical process without requiring interfer-
ometric alignment or phase stabilization.
• Accessibility: Implementation is straightforward using widely available intensity-modulating devices.
By operating in the intensity domain, active PANS minimizes hardware requirements and maximizes compatibility
with real-world deployment scenarios.
B.
Non-negativity constraint and squared parameterization
Because we encode information directly in light intensity, the values must be non-negative. This constraint must
be respected during optimization to ensure that trained patterns are physically realizable.
We enforce non-negativity through a squared parameterization: the trainable parameters ˜W ∈Rdf×dobj are uncon-
strained real values, and the physical illumination weights are computed as:
W = ˜W 2
(element-wise squaring),
(12)
so that wij = ˜w2
ij ≥0 for all elements.
14
This approach offers several advantages over alternatives such as clamped value ranges [9, 18] or projected gradient
descent:
• Smooth gradient flow: Gradients flow smoothly through the squaring operation, avoiding the discontinuities
and zero-gradient regions that arise with projection-based methods. Common methods like clamping W ←
max(W, 0) [9, 12] create a hard boundary where gradients vanish for negative values, stalling optimization.
• Automatic gradient scaling: The gradient ∂wij
∂˜
wij = 2 ˜wij provides natural scaling—gradients for small weights are
automatically suppressed, stabilizing training and preventing oscillations near zero.
• Sparse solutions: The squared parameterization naturally encourages sparsity, as small parameter values | ˜wij| ≪
1 are mapped to very small (nearly zero) physical weights wij ≪1. This promotes efficient photon allocation
by concentrating illumination on informative spatial modes.
• No projection step: Unlike projected gradient descent, which requires an explicit projection onto the non-negative
orthant after each update, the squared parameterization inherently satisfies the constraint without additional
computational overhead.
The gradient with respect to the trainable parameters follows from the chain rule:
∂L
∂˜wij
= ∂L
∂wij
· ∂wij
∂˜wij
= ∂L
∂wij
· 2 ˜wij.
(13)
C.
Photon budget control
A key advantage of photon-aware modeling is that all parameters maintain precise physical meanings. The total
number of illumination photons across all patterns is:
Nillu =
X
i,j
wij.
(14)
We incorporate photon budget control through L2 regularization on the parameterization ˜W:
Ltotal = Ltask(fθ(⃗a), y) + α · ∥˜W∥2
2,
(15)
where Ltask is the task-specific loss (e.g., cross-entropy for classification), fθ is the digital decoder, and α ≥0 controls
the trade-off between task performance and photon budget.
The key observation is that the L2 norm of the parameterization equals the total illumination:
∥˜W∥2
2 =
X
i,j
˜w2
ij =
X
i,j
wij = Nillu.
(16)
Thus, the regularization term directly penalizes the total illumination energy. By varying α, we train models optimized
for different photon budget regimes (Fig. 2E). Without photon-aware modeling, such direct optimization of the physical
photon budget would not be possible.
15
D.
Training procedure
Training follows the general framework described in Appendix 1, with the encoding ⃗λ = ˜W 2⃗x and regularization
term α∥˜W∥2
2.
For initialization, we use Kaiming uniform initialization on ˜W with scaling factor a = 1.2 (Appendix 6 B). This
produces moderate initial λ values after the squaring operation, ensuring that training begins in a regime where
gradients are well-behaved.
The complete training algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Training of active PANS
Require: Training data {(⃗x(n), y(n))}, regularization coefficient α, initial slope η0, annealing factor θanneal, intensity
clamp λmax
Ensure: Trained parameters ˜W ∗, θ∗
1: Initialize ˜W and θ
2: η ←η0
3: for epoch = 1 to num epochs do
4:
for each minibatch {(⃗x, y)} do
5:
Forward pass
6:
W ←˜W 2
▷Squared parameterization for non-negativity
7:
⃗λ ←W⃗x
▷Expected detected optical energy
8:
⃗λ ←min(⃗λ, λmax)
▷Maximum intensity clamping
9:
⃗p ←1 −exp

−η · ⃗λ

▷Detection probabilities from photon statistics
10:
⃗a ∼Bernoulli(⃗p)
▷Stochastic SPD activation
11:
⃗a ←BatchNorm(⃗a)
▷Batch normalization
12:
ˆy ←fθ(⃗a)
▷Digital back-end output
13:
L ←Ltask(ˆy, y) + α∥˜W∥2
2
▷Total loss
14:
15:
Backward pass
16:
Compute ga = ∂Ltask/∂⃗a and gθ = ∂Ltask/∂θ via backprop through fθ
17:
gp ←ga
▷“Straight-through” here (STE)
18:
gλ ←η · exp

−η⃗λ

⊙gp
▷∂p/∂λ = ηe−ηλ
19:
gW ←gλ⃗x⊤
▷∂λ/∂W
20:
g ˜
W ←2 ˜W ⊙gW + 2α ˜W
▷∂W/∂˜W + regularization
21:
22:
Parameter update
23:
˜W ←Update( ˜W, g ˜
W )
▷Update optical front end
24:
θ ←Update(θ, gθ)
▷Update digital back end
25:
end for
26:
η ←θanneal · η
▷Slope annealing
27: end for
16
Appendix 4.
PASSIVE PANS WITH LINEAR OPTICAL PROCESSORS
Active PANS (Appendix 3) controls structured illumination to encode object information before detection. How-
ever, many sensing scenarios involve optical signals from sources that cannot be controlled—astronomical observations,
surveillance, fiber-optic sensing, scattered light through turbid media, and similar applications. Passive PANS ad-
dresses these scenarios by applying learnable transformations to the incoming optical field before detection, rather
than shaping the outgoing illumination.
From an algorithmic perspective, both active and passive PANS instantiate the same photon-aware framework:
a parameterized optical encoder produces expected photon counts ⃗λ, which pass through stochastic single-photon
detection and digital post-processing. The distinction lies entirely in the physical deployment—whether the encoder
acts on light we generate (active) or light we receive (passive). This flexibility makes passive PANS applicable wherever
the signal originates from the environment or system under observation rather than from controlled illumination.
Optical linear processors have driven decades of advancement in optical neural networks [19], with established
implementations in both free-space [20–24] and on-chip [25–27] platforms. In this section, we demonstrate through
simulations that PANS extends naturally to passive optical encoders that apply learnable linear transformations to
incoming optical fields.
A.
Optical encoding via field transformation
We focus on linear optical processors with real-valued transmission matrices as our primary demonstration of passive
PANS. This choice reflects the prevalence of such transformations across optical computing architectures—from spatial
light modulation to integrated photonic meshes [23, 26]—and their experimental maturity developed over decades of
research in optical matrix-vector multiplication.
The transmission matrix W of a general linear optical processor can have complex-valued elements.
For our
demonstrations, we restrict to real-valued W ∈Rdf×din, primarily because real-valued matrix-vector multiplication is
already well-established in optical hardware—multiple platforms have demonstrated programmable real-valued linear
transformations in both free-space [22, 23] and integrated photonic [24, 26] implementations. Since our goal is to
demonstrate that photon-aware modeling provides advantages for photon-limited sensing rather than to optimize the
encoder architecture itself, real-valued linear encoders provide a concrete, experimentally accessible choice for this
purpose.
Mathematical formulation
The optical encoder is a linear optical processor characterized by a transmission matrix W ∈Rdf×din. For an input
field with amplitude vector ⃗E, the transformed field is:
⃗E′ = W ⃗E.
(17)
17
The detected intensity at each output port i is the squared magnitude of the corresponding field amplitude:
λi = |E′
i|2 =

X
j
wijEj

2
.
(18)
In vector notation:
⃗λ = (W ⃗E)2
(element-wise squaring).
(19)
This intensity-detection model differs from active PANS in several ways.
First, the mapping from weights to
expected photon counts is quadratic, creating a more complex optimization landscape. Second, interference between
input modes contributes to each output, enabling the system to exploit phase relationships in the input field. Third,
total detected power is bounded by input power—photons can only be redistributed among output ports, not created.
Because many optical platforms support both positive and negative real-valued weights through phase control, no
squared parameterization is needed—the weights W are trained directly as unconstrained real values.
Gradient computation
The squared relationship between field amplitude and intensity introduces an additional factor in the gradient.
Defining the intermediate variable ⃗z = W ⃗E so that ⃗λ = ⃗z2, the gradient for the i-th detector is:
∂λi
∂wij
= 2zi · Ej = 2
 X
k
wikEk
!
Ej.
(20)
In the backward pass, we first compute the gradient with respect to the intermediate field amplitudes, gz = 2⃗z ⊙gλ,
where gλ = ∂L/∂⃗λ is backpropagated through the detection and digital layers. The gradient then propagates to the
weights via gW = gz ⃗E⊤, or equivalently in matrix form:
∂L
∂W = 2 diag(⃗z) · gλ ⃗E⊤.
(21)
B.
Intensity-based encoding
As another example, we explore passive intensity-based linear transformations [28] that are compatible with spatially
incoherent light sources. This encoding can be understood as a reallocation of the input intensity distribution across
the detector array.
For incoherent light characterized by intensity distribution ⃗I ∈Rdin
≥0, intensities add directly
without interference:
λi =
X
j
wijIj,
wij ≥0.
(22)
18
In matrix form:
⃗λ = W ⃗I,
W ∈Rdf×din
≥0
.
(23)
This linear mapping ⃗λ = W ⃗I is mathematically identical to the active PANS encoding, but the intensity origi-
nates from an external source rather than controlled illumination. Since intensities cannot interfere destructively,
the transformation weights must be non-negative, enforced through squared parameterization W = ˜W 2, similar to
Appendix 3 B.
C.
Training procedure
Training follows the general framework described in Appendix 1. For passive encoders processing external light
sources, there is no illumination budget to regularize, so the loss function is simply:
Ltotal = Ltask(fθ(⃗a), y).
(24)
The optical encoder learns to optimally redistribute the available photons across feature dimensions to maximize
task performance. The training algorithm for coherent passive PANS is summarized in Algorithm 3.
19
Algorithm 3 Training of passive PANS (coherent field encoding)
Require: Training data {( ⃗E(n), y(n))}, initial slope η0, annealing factor θanneal, intensity clamp λmax
Ensure: Trained parameters W ∗, θ∗
1: Initialize W and θ
2: η ←η0
3: for epoch = 1 to num epochs do
4:
for each minibatch {( ⃗E, y)} do
5:
Forward pass
6:
⃗z ←W ⃗E
▷Linear transformation of field amplitudes
7:
⃗λ ←|⃗z|2
▷Intensity from squared amplitude
8:
⃗λ ←min(⃗λ, λmax)
▷Maximum intensity clamping
9:
⃗p ←1 −exp

−η · ⃗λ

▷Detection probabilities from photon statistics
10:
⃗a ∼Bernoulli(⃗p)
▷Stochastic SPD activation
11:
⃗a ←BatchNorm(⃗a)
▷Normalize activations
12:
ˆy ←fθ(⃗a)
▷Digital back-end output
13:
L ←Ltask(ˆy, y)
▷Task loss
14:
15:
Backward pass
16:
Compute ga = ∂L/∂⃗a and gθ = ∂L/∂θ via backprop through fθ
17:
gp ←ga
▷“Straight-through” here (STE)
18:
gλ ←η · exp

−η⃗λ

⊙gp
▷∂p/∂λ = ηe−ηλ
19:
gz ←2⃗z ⊙gλ
▷∂λ/∂z = 2z
20:
gW ←gz ⃗E⊤
▷∂z/∂W
21:
22:
Parameter update
23:
W ←Update(W, gW )
▷Update optical front end
24:
θ ←Update(θ, gθ)
▷Update digital back end
25:
end for
26:
η ←θanneal · η
▷Slope annealing
27: end for
20
Appendix 5.
PHOTON BUDGET SCALING
Evaluating and comparing sensing performance under photon-limited conditions requires systematically varying the
photon budget. This section introduces the relevant quantities and describes the principal methods for scaling photon
budget, clarifying when each method applies and the considerations specific to PANS.
A.
Detected photons Ndet
The photon budget for sensing is characterized by Ndet, the total number of detected photons per inference. Given
an object ⃗x, recall from Appendix 1 that the optical front-end maps it to expected photon numbers ⃗λ ∈Rdf
≥0 at the
df detectors. The total expected detected photons is simply the sum:
E[Ndet] =
df
X
i=1
λi.
(25)
The actual detected photon count Ndet is a random variable sampled from this expectation according to the photon
statistics at each detector.
B.
Scaling average photon level
The most straightforward way to vary Ndet is to scale the average photon level at detection. The detected optical
energy per measurement is determined by both the optical power reaching the detector and the integration time.
Denoting the combined effect as a global scaling factor η > 0 applied to the object signal, we have ⃗x →η · ⃗x, and
consequently ⃗λ →η · ⃗λ and E[Ndet] →η · E[Ndet].
In practice, this scaling can be achieved by attenuating or amplifying the optical signal (e.g., using neutral density
filters, adjusting the light source power, or modifying transmission through the system), or equivalently by adjusting
the detector integration time. Both approaches allow continuous scaling of the photon budget to any desired level.
This scaling does not affect the fundamental ability to extract information from the signal. Consider everyday
experience: we recognize a familiar face whether seen under bright midday sun or in the soft light of dusk, and
putting on sunglasses uniformly attenuates all incoming light yet we perceive and recognize the same scene. Our
perception depends on the relative contrasts and spatial patterns, not on the absolute brightness. The same principle
applies broadly to sensing and machine learning: pattern recognition tasks depend on relative relationships in the
input, not absolute values. Uniformly scaling η preserves these relative relationships, so information extraction is
unaffected.
This is why η scaling is the standard method for evaluating sensing performance across different photon regimes: it
provides continuous control over photon budget while preserving the information content of the signal. This applies
universally to direct imaging and optical encoding methods where the detected signal is treated as a continuous
quantity.
However, scaling η is not well-suited for PANS. PANS fundamentally differs because it explicitly models the stochas-
tic photon detection process during training. In this framework, each parameter acquires a precise physical meaning:
21
the elements of the optical transformation directly determine expected photon numbers ⃗λ, which govern the detection
statistics. Once the model is optimized, the trained parameters are optimal with respect to a specific value of η
(i.e., specific optical power and integration time settings). Tuning η after training—whether increasing or decreasing
it—pushes the system away from its optimized operating point.
This distinction highlights a key aspect of PANS: the photon-aware modeling ensures that trained parameters have
definite physical interpretations, but this also means the system needs to be calibrated to meet these specific operating
conditions in experimental implementation (Appendix 12). Fortunately, our trained models exhibit robustness to η
within a reasonable range (Fig. A9), so the calibration requirement is not overly stringent and the system remains
stable during deployment, including robustness to typical intensity fluctuations.
C.
K-shot scaling
K-shot scaling provides an alternative way to vary photon budget by taking K repeated measurements per detector.
Recall from Appendix 1 that PANS uses single-photon detection (SPD) measurements, where each measurement
produces a binary outcome a(k)
i
∈{0, 1}. With df detectors and K shots each, the total detected photons is:
Ndet =
df
X
i=1
K
X
k=1
a(k)
i
.
(26)
This provides discrete scaling of the photon budget.
K-shot scaling is essentially equivalent to η scaling via integration time, but in discrete increments. This discretiza-
tion is not merely a theoretical construct—it reflects how real photon-counting detectors operate. Photon detection
devices general have fixed integration windows determined by their recovery time or readout clock, and they output
binary or discrete count signals. Even detectors that appear to provide “continuous” exposure operate with discrete
clock cycles at the hardware level. The notion of truly continuous integration time is an idealization; in practice, pho-
ton detection always involves some fundamental time discretization. Thus, K-shot scaling—accumulating K discrete
measurements—is a natural and realistic way to increase photon budget.
For conventional sensing approaches that treat detection as continuous, K-shot scaling is equivalent to η scaling via
integration time: taking K repeated measurements is analogous to integrating for K times longer. The two approaches
yield the same expected Ndet and, in principle, the same information content (neglecting practical considerations such
as per-readout noise).
For PANS, K-shot scaling is a natural extension once a system is trained and deployed. The training process opti-
mizes the optical front-end for a specific configuration, including the average photon level per detection (corresponding
to fixed input power, transmission, and integration time settings). Given this fixed configuration, a straightforward
way to collect more information is simply to perform additional measurements under identical conditions.
Once
experimental parameters are set, the detector continuously operates and can accumulate data over multiple shots.
At first glance, K-shot scaling appears to be an appropriate way to vary photon budget for PANS while respecting
the trained configuration. However, this is not how we report results in the main text, because K-shot scaling does
not fully demonstrate the algorithmic capability of PANS.
The key observation is this: with K-shot scaling, the total number of detection events is df ×K, but during training
22
we only optimized the mapping for df individual features and simply repeat sampling from the same expected feature
values. In principle, if we could optimize the mapping for every single feature we detect—meaning all df × K features
independently, each designed to extract complementary information about the object—the system would have greater
capacity to retain information through the detection bottleneck for a given total number of detections (or equivalently,
a given photon budget).
To illustrate, consider df = 10 with K = 2 versus df = 20 with K = 1. Both configurations yield 20 total detection
events with similar expected Ndet. However, the df = 20 configuration has 20 independently optimized features,
while the df = 10 configuration optimizes only 10 features that are each sampled twice. The former should retain at
least as much—and typically more—task-relevant information because every feature can be tailored to extract unique
information about the object. Simulation results in Appendix 7 A confirm this intuition.
That said, K-shot scaling remains practically valuable for deployment. Once a model is trained and the experi-
mental setup is configured, it is often easier to take samples continuously than to reconfigure the system. Real-world
constraints such as speed requirements, detector availability, or optical system complexity may make K > 1 the
pragmatic choice. The point is that for reporting the fundamental scaling behavior of PANS—demonstrating what
the algorithm can achieve given certain physical constraints—we should use df scaling with K = 1 to show the true
expressive capacity of the end-to-end optimization.
D.
Feature dimension (df) scaling
Given the above considerations, df scaling emerges as the principled approach for characterizing PANS performance:
we vary df while fixing K = 1, training each configuration independently. This ensures that for any given photon bud-
get, all available detection events correspond to independently optimized features, fully exploiting the optimization’s
capacity to maximize information retention through the detection bottleneck for the given Ndet.
More generally, df scaling applies to any end-to-end optimized approach where the number of output dimensions
can be varied. Each df configuration is trained separately, allowing the optimization to find the best solution given
that specific constraint. Performance is then evaluated at the corresponding photon budget, providing a fair charac-
terization of what each method can achieve.
E.
Summary of scaling methods
Table A2 summarizes the applicability of each scaling method across different sensing approaches.
Table A2. Photon budget scaling methods and their applicability across sensing approaches.
Approach
Photon level (η)
K-shot
df
Direct imaging
Applicable
≡η
N/A
Conventional optical encoding
Applicable
≡η
Applicable
PANS
Limited
Practical
Optimized
Scaling the average photon level (η) is applicable to any approach where information extraction depends only on
relative signal values, not absolute values. This includes direct imaging and conventional optical encoding methods,
23
where the detected signal is treated as a continuous quantity. K-shot scaling is equivalent to η scaling for these
approaches (denoted “≡η” in the table), as repeated measurements are analogous to extended integration time.
For PANS, scaling η has limited applicability because the trained parameters are optimized for specific absolute
photon levels, as discussed in Appendix 5 B. K-shot scaling is practical for deployment but suboptimal for character-
izing algorithmic capability, since it does not allow independent optimization of every single feature. df scaling with
K = 1 is the optimized approach that fully demonstrates what PANS can achieve at each photon budget level; this
is the method used throughout the main text.
For conventional optical encoding, df scaling is applicable and provides a way to systematically evaluate performance,
though full optimization at each df is needed to observe meaningful scaling behavior.
F.
Reporting Ndet and performance variability
When reporting results such as test accuracy for classification tasks, Ndet exhibits variability from two sources that
must be properly accounted for.
Object-dependent variability.
Different test objects ⃗x produce different expected photon numbers ⃗λ, and hence different E[Ndet] via Eq. (25).
When reporting test accuracy with respect to a particular Ndet value, we average the detected photon counts over the
test set to obtain a representative value. This averaging over test samples is standard practice in machine learning
evaluation.
Shot-to-shot variability.
Even for a fixed object, Ndet fluctuates across repeated measurements due to the stochastic nature of photon
detection. This source of variability is less common in conventional machine learning, where models are typically
deterministic or nearly deterministic—given the same input, the same or very similar output is produced. In photon-
starved sensing, however, the intrinsic stochasticity of detection means that repeated inferences on the same object
yield very different feature vectors and potentially different outcomes; we must consider the probability distribution
in the feature space rather than fixed points.
In high signal-to-noise regimes, this variability is relatively small (the coefficient of variation scales as 1/√Ndet) and
has minimal impact on performance. However, in the few-photon regime central to PANS, shot-to-shot variability
becomes pronounced. For example, with Poisson statistics, detecting on average 1 photon per measurement (λ = 1)
gives a “signal-to-noise ratio” of 1, meaning the standard deviation of the signal equals its mean value.
A key contribution of our work is demonstrating that despite this significant stochasticity, PANS achieves reliable
high-accuracy sensing. To faithfully characterize this reliability, we report test accuracy as mean ± standard deviation
over multiple repeated inferences.
24
Distinction between K and repeated trials.
It is important to distinguish between K-shot measurements and repeated trials for evaluating variability. When
using K > 1 shots, all K measurements contribute to a single inference: the total Ndet for that inference is the
sum over all K × df detection events, and the system produces one output (e.g., one classification decision) based on
this combined information. In contrast, when we report mean ± standard deviation over multiple trials, we perform
multiple independent single-shot inferences, each with K = 1, to characterize the probability distribution of single-
shot outcomes. Although the data collection process may appear similar—repeatedly acquiring measurements with
fixed experimental setup—the conceptual distinction is crucial: K > 1 increases the photon budget per inference,
while repeated trials characterize the statistical distribution of outcomes at a fixed photon budget (K = 1).
For example, reporting “30 trials per test image” means we perform 30 independent single-shot (K = 1) inferences
on each test image, computing the mean and standard deviation of the resulting accuracy to characterize reliability.
This is fundamentally different from using K = 30, which would constitute a single inference with 30 times more
detected photons. Detailed evaluation protocols for specific tasks are described in subsequent sections.
25
Part II:
Numerical simulation details
This part provides detailed numerical simulation results and implementation specifics for the PANS framework intro-
duced in Part . We begin with training considerations using active PANS on FashionMNIST as a case study, then
present testing procedures and results for additional tasks.
Appendix 6.
TRAINING PANS MODELS
This section walks through the training process for photon-aware neuromorphic sensing (PANS) models using
active PANS with FashionMNIST 10-class object classification as a representative example.
The considerations
discussed here—model architecture, hyperparameter selection, and photon budget control—apply broadly to other
PANS configurations and tasks.
FashionMNIST serves as a suitable benchmark: it is widely used in the machine learning community, its classes (T-
shirt, trouser, pullover, dress, coat, sandal, shirt, sneaker, bag, ankle boot) represent recognizable object shapes, and
its grayscale 28×28 images better approximate general object morphology than simple digit datasets. While relatively
simple compared to real-world sensing tasks, it suffices to establish methodology and demonstrate the framework’s
capabilities.
A.
Model architecture
The active PANS model consists of three stages following the framework in Appendix 3: an optical front-end that
encodes object information into expected photon counts, a stochastic photon detection layer, and a digital back-end
that processes the detected features for classification.
The key components are:
• input weights: trainable parameters ˜W, squared in the forward pass to enforce non-negativity (Appendix 3 B).
• PhotonActivation: stochastic SPD process, serving as neural activation with straight-through gradient esti-
mation (Appendix 1 B).
• feature bn: batch normalization of the feature vectors (dim. df) after detection.
• conv layers, fc layers: configurable digital back-end neural network.
Listing 1 shows the PyTorch implementation.
26
1 import
torch
2 import
torch.nn as nn
3 import
torch.nn.functional as F
4
5 class
PANSActive(nn.Module):
6
"""Active
PANS with
structured
illumination
encoding.
7
8
Args:
9
n_input: Input
dimension (d_obj in paper , e.g., 784 for 28x28)
10
n_output: Number of output
classes
11
n_feature: Number of features/illumination
patterns (d_\text{f} in paper
)
12
in_channels: Input
channels
for conv
layers (default 1)
13
conv_channels: Channel
config for conv
blocks ([] to disable)
14
conv_kernel: Kernel
size for conv
layers
15
pool_size: Pooling
window
size
16
fc_units: Hidden
units in fully
connected
layers
17
"""
18
19
def
__init__(self , n_input , n_output , n_feature , in_channels =1,
20
conv_channels =[[64 ,64] , [128 ,128] , [256 ,256 ,256]] ,
21
conv_kernel =15, pool_size =2, fc_units =[512]):
22
super ().__init__ ()
23
24
# Optical front -end: trainable
illumination
patterns
25
self.input_weights = nn.Parameter(torch.empty(n_feature , n_input))
26
nn.init. kaiming_uniform_ (self.input_weights , a=1.2)
27
28
# Photon
detection
layer (defined in Section 1)
29
self.photon_act = PhotonActivation ()
30
31
# Digital back -end: Batch
normalization
32
self.feature_bn = nn.BatchNorm1d(n_feature)
33
34
# Digital back -end: Conv
blocks
35
conv_modules = []
36
conv_output_size = n_feature
37
for block in conv_channels:
38
for out_ch in block:
39
conv_modules.extend ([
40
nn.Conv1d(in_channels , out_ch , conv_kernel ,
41
padding=conv_kernel // 2),
42
nn.BatchNorm1d(out_ch), nn.ReLU ()])
43
in_channels = out_ch
44
conv_modules.append(nn.AvgPool1d(pool_size))
45
conv_output_size
//=
pool_size
46
self.conv_layers = nn.Sequential (* conv_modules)
27
47
48
# Digital back -end: Fully
connected
layers
49
if len(conv_channels) > 0:
50
fc_input_size = conv_output_size * conv_channels [ -1][ -1]
51
else:
52
fc_input_size = n_feature
53
fc_modules = []
54
for units in fc_units:
55
fc_modules.extend ([nn.Linear(fc_input_size , units), nn.ReLU ()])
56
fc_input_size = units
57
fc_modules.append(nn.Linear(fc_input_size , n_output))
58
self.fc_layers = nn.Sequential (* fc_modules)
59
60
def
forward(self , x, n_rep=1, slope =1.0):
61
x = x.view(x.size (0), -1)
62
# Optical
encoding: squared
weights
ensure non -negativity
63
x = F.linear(x, self.input_weights ** 2)
64
# Stochastic
photon
detection
65
x = self.photon_act(x, n_rep=n_rep , slope=slope)
66
# Digital
processing
67
x = self.feature_bn(x)
68
x = self.conv_layers(x.unsqueeze (1))
69
x = self.fc_layers(x.view(x.size (0), -1))
70
return F.log_softmax(x, dim =1)
Listing 1. PyTorch implementation of the active PANS model.
Optical front end
The optical front-end is parameterized by input weights ˜W ∈Rdf×dobj.
As described in Appendix 3 B, the
physical illumination weights are W =
˜W 2 (element-wise), ensuring non-negativity.
Kaiming initialization with
a = 1.2 produces moderate initial λi values (Appendix 3 D).
Photon detection layer
The PhotonActivation module implements the stochastic SPD process (Appendix 1 A) with straight-through
gradient estimation (Appendix 1 B). The n rep parameter controls K-shot averaging: n rep=1 for single-shot mode.
slope corresponds to the slope parameter η discussed in Appendix 1 C.
Digital back end
The digital back-end processes the df-dimensional feature vector after detection. Its architecture should be expressive
enough that the information bottleneck remains at detection, not at digital processing (cf. Fig. 1A in main text).
The back end consists of the following stages:
28
1. Batch normalization: Normalizes the feature vector across the batch, stabilizing training given the high
variance of photon-limited measurements.
2. Convolutional layers (optional): The conv channels parameter specifies the convolutional architecture as
a nested list, where each inner list defines a block of consecutive convolutional layers, and average pooling
is applied between blocks. For example, [[64,64], [128,128], [256,256,256]] specifies three blocks: the
first with two 64-channel layers, the second with two 128-channel layers, and the third with three 256-channel
layers, with average pooling (size pool size) after each block. We found average pooling to work better than
max pooling in the few-photon regime, likely because it better preserves the statistical properties of the sparse
activations. Setting conv channels=[] disables convolutional layers entirely, leaving only the fully connected
layers specified by fc units. This flexibility allows trading off model expressivity against training efficiency, as
discussed below.
3. Fully connected layers: The fc units parameter specifies hidden layer sizes with ReLU activations. For
example, fc units=[512,512] creates two hidden layers with 512 neurons each.
4. Output layer: A linear layer mapping to n output classes, followed by log-softmax for use with negative
log-likelihood loss.
The specific hyperparameters (kernel sizes, pooling sizes, number of channels, etc.) are configurable and may require
tuning for different tasks.
B.
Training procedure
Training PANS models involves navigating a complex hyperparameter space. The total loss combines task perfor-
mance with photon budget regularization (Appendix 3 C):
L = LCE(ˆy, y) + α · ∥˜W∥2
F ,
(27)
where LCE is the cross-entropy loss and α ≥0 controls the accuracy–photon budget trade-off.
The general workflow proceeds as follows:
1. Choose digital back-end architecture. Select the depth and width of convolutional and FC layers based on
task complexity.
2. For each feature dimension df and regularization strength α, train models while fine-tuning hyper-
parameters (Algorithm 2). Many factors interact: learning rate distribution across model components, slope
annealing schedule, intensity clamping threshold λmax, batch size, initialization scale, and more.
3. Select models achieving desired accuracy–photon trade-offs.
Achieving optimal performance requires careful hyperparameter tuning for each combination of (df, backend, α).
This makes systematic exploration computationally expensive and labor-intensive. Table A3 summarizes the baseline
configuration.
29
Table A3. Baseline training configuration for active PANS on FashionMNIST.
Parameter
Value
Optimizer
Adam
Learning rate (optical front-end, conv layers)
10−3
Learning rate (FC layers)
10−4
Batch size
128
Maximum epochs
500
Training shots per activation (K)
1
Weight initialization
Kaiming uniform, a = 1.2
C.
Choice of digital back-end architecture
For the digital classifier, we compared several architectures on FashionMNIST with df = 32: a simple MLP
with a single hidden layer of 512 units (df →512 →10), and a convolutional network with channel configura-
tion [[64, 64], [128, 128], [256, 256, 256]] (as stated in Appendix 6 A), using kernel size 15 (which we found performed
better than the conventional kernel size 3) and average pooling with pool size 2. The convolutional network achieves
approximately 83% test accuracy, while the MLP achieves approximately 82%—a difference of roughly one percentage
point.
Given this modest gap, we adopt the MLP architecture throughout this work.
This choice keeps the digital
back-end consistent across all experiments and, more importantly, makes hyperparameter optimization practical. As
discussed below, achieving the desired balance between classification accuracy and photon budget requires careful
tuning of the regularization strength α along with learning rate schedules and other training parameters.
These
interactions are delicate: small changes in α can shift the accuracy–photon operating point substantially, and the
optimal settings depend on df, the target photon budget, and the specific task. Using a simple MLP architecture
reduces the dimensionality of this search space, allowing us to explore the accuracy–photon tradeoff more thoroughly.
D.
Illumination regularization and the accuracy–photon tradeoff
The regularization coefficient α in the loss function (Eq. 27) controls the tradeoff between classification accuracy
and total illumination photons Nillu. To illustrate how this tradeoff manifests during training, Fig. A3–Fig. A6 show
training dynamics across a range of α values for df ∈{10, 16, 24, 32} on FashionMNIST.
These training curves provide a general sense of how α affects the accuracy–photon tradeoff, helping to identify
the parameter regime worth exploring for a given application. The α values shown span several orders of magnitude,
from no regularization (α = 0) to strong regularization (α = 10−2), illustrating the qualitative transitions in training
behavior.
The specific α values in these figures are illustrative rather than prescriptive. The models deployed in our exper-
iments (Tables Table A6 and Table A7) were trained with α values chosen through additional fine-tuning for each
(df) configuration. This fine-tuning involves adjusting not only α but also learning rate schedules, batch sizes, and
training duration in ways that depend on the particular operating point. Such model-specific adjustments are difficult
to systematize into general rules. The sweeps shown here serve as a starting point: they help locate the α range where
30
c
b
d
e
a
f
g
Fig. A3. Training dynamics under different illumination regularization α for df = 10. Each panel shows
training accuracy (blue), test accuracy (orange), and total illumination photon budget Nillu (green dashed, right
axis) versus training epoch. The df and α values are indicated above each panel. All models use the training
configuration in Table A3 with only α varied.
31
c
b
d
e
a
f
g
Fig. A4. Training dynamics under different illumination regularization α for df = 16. Each panel shows
training accuracy (blue), test accuracy (orange), and total illumination photon budget Nillu (green dashed, right
axis) versus training epoch. The df and α values are indicated above each panel. All models use the training
configuration in Table A3 with only α varied.
32
c
b
d
e
a
f
g
Fig. A5. Training dynamics under different illumination regularization α for df = 24. Each panel shows
training accuracy (blue), test accuracy (orange), and total illumination photon budget Nillu (green dashed, right
axis) versus training epoch. The df and α values are indicated above each panel. All models use the training
configuration in Table A3 with only α varied.
33
c
b
d
e
a
f
g
Fig. A6. Training dynamics under different illumination regularization α for df = 32. Each panel shows
training accuracy (blue), test accuracy (orange), and total illumination photon budget Nillu (green dashed, right
axis) versus training epoch. The df and α values are indicated above each panel. All models use the training
configuration in Table A3 with only α varied.
34
accuracy and photon budget are both reasonable, after which more targeted exploration within that range yields the
final model.
Qualitative regimes
Despite the need for model-specific tuning, several qualitative observations apply broadly:
No regularization (α = 0).
Without illumination penalty, the optimizer freely increases pattern intensities to
improve classification. Accuracy converges normally, but Nillu grows without bound, reaching thousands of photons.
Such models are unsuitable for photon-constrained sensing.
Weak regularization.
The illumination penalty prevents Nillu from diverging.
In this regime, Nillu converges
to a stable value during training, but the photon level remains relatively high, providing limited benefit over the
unregularized case.
Moderate regularization.
The penalty significantly constrains Nillu while causing only modest accuracy reduction.
This is the practically useful regime: the system learns to allocate photons efficiently, and the accuracy–photon
tradeoff is favorable. When selecting models for deployment, we search within this regime to find configurations that
achieve target accuracy at minimal photon cost.
Strong regularization.
When the penalty dominates, Nillu is driven to extremely low levels—likely below the point
where sufficient information remains for accurate classification. Accuracy degrades substantially as the optimizer
prioritizes reducing illumination at the expense of learning discriminative features. Training may also become unstable,
exhibiting persistent oscillations.
E.
Effect of regularization on learned patterns
The regularization affects not only the total photon budget but also the spatial structure of the learned patterns.
To illustrate this, Fig. A7 displays the df = 10 illumination patterns in a PANS front end at four stages during training
with α = 10−4.
To visualize how the weight distribution evolves during training regardless of the absolute intensity scale (which
varies substantially as shown in Fig. A3–Fig. A6), we normalize patterns by their mean pixel value for display
purposes—this normalization is not used during actual training or inference, where values retain their physical meaning
in photon numbers. Specifically, for df = 10 patterns each containing 28 × 28 = 784 pixels, we divide all pixel values
by the mean across all 10 × 784 values. After normalization, the mean pixel value equals 1, so the total across one
pattern equals 784. This allows us to examine how the distribution of weights evolves independent of the overall
intensity scale.
The number above each pattern indicates its individual mean pixel value after normalization, and the color bar
shows the range of pixel values at each stage. We do not specify exact epoch numbers because the training dynamics
depend heavily on configuration details such as slope scheduling, learning rate distribution across model components,
and other hyperparameters discussed earlier in this section; the qualitative progression matters more than the specific
epoch count.
Early in training (Fig. A7a), patterns are spatially diffuse, with intensity spread across broad regions resembling
35
edge-like or blob-like features.
The value range spans 0–18 times the mean, indicating moderate variation.
As
training progresses (Fig. A7b–d), the patterns become increasingly sparse and localized: intensity concentrates into
small clusters of pixels while most of the image becomes dark. By the later stages, the maximum value extends to
≳100 times the mean, reflecting highly uneven distributions where a few pixels carry most of the energy despite the
fixed mean pixel value of 1.
This concentration reflects the PANS framework learning to allocate photons efficiently.
Under the constraint
of a detection bottleneck, the optimizer discovers that selectively probing specific spatial locations—rather than
illuminating the object uniformly—better preserves task-relevant information under stringent photon budgets.
36
a
d
b
c
Training epochs
Fig. A7. Evolution of learned illumination patterns during training. Each panel displays the df = 10
patterns from a model trained with α = 10−4, shown at four stages with training progressing from a to d. For
visualization, patterns are normalized such that the mean pixel value across all patterns equals 1 (corresponding to
a total of 784 per pattern); the number above each pattern shows its individual mean. The color bar indicates pixel
value range. Early in training (a), patterns are spatially diffuse with moderate intensity variation. Through training
(b–d), patterns become increasingly sparse and localized, concentrating intensity into small regions while the
maximum value expands from ∼18 to ∼100 times the mean (color bar), reflecting efficient photon allocation to
discriminative spatial locations.
37
Appendix 7.
TESTING TRAINED PANS MODELS
After training produces models across a range of (df, α) configurations (Appendix 6), we select representative
models that achieve good accuracy–photon tradeoffs for systematic evaluation. This section examines three factors
that affect testing performance beyond the trained model weights: the number of measurement shots K, the photon
level scaling factor η, and the dark count rate (DCR). Understanding these factors is essential for bridging the gap
between numerical simulation and practical sensing applications.
All testing results in this section use 200 test images from FashionMNIST, with each configuration repeated 100
times to capture the stochastic variability inherent to single-photon detection. This protocol mirrors our experimental
implementation described in later sections.
A.
Multi-shot (K > 1) evaluation
Our models are trained with K = 1 (single-shot measurement per feature), but a natural question arises: how
does performance scale when we allow multiple measurements? This directly tests the theoretical argument from
Appendix 5 C, where we predicted that increasing df with K = 1 should outperform increasing K with fixed df, given
the same total number of detection events (total feature size) df × K.
In numerical simulation, evaluating at different K values is straightforward—we simply specify the number of
repeated measurements in the forward pass, and the model internally sums the stochastic binary outcomes to form
the activation vector. In practice, this is equivalent to continuous collection on the photon detector with the same
experimental setup. Table A4 presents the results across different (df, K) configurations.
Table A4. Test accuracy (%) on FashionMNIST for different feature dimensions df and shot counts K. Each entry
shows mean ± standard deviation over 100 trials with 200 test images.
K = 1
K = 2
K = 3
K = 5
df = 3
54.46 ± 1.31
55.20 ± 1.67
55.88 ± 1.35
56.68 ± 1.44
df = 4
65.11 ± 2.07
66.26 ± 1.90
67.20 ± 1.55
68.38 ± 1.59
df = 6
68.37 ± 2.06
70.15 ± 1.84
71.33 ± 1.50
71.29 ± 1.32
df = 10
74.31 ± 1.84
77.55 ± 1.32
77.53 ± 1.32
78.48 ± 1.16
df = 16
78.30 ± 1.96
81.42 ± 1.48
81.85 ± 1.36
82.34 ± 1.32
df = 24
80.35 ± 1.78
81.98 ± 1.39
82.22 ± 1.26
82.35 ± 1.16
df = 32
83.13 ± 1.48
84.39 ± 1.48
85.02 ± 1.15
85.34 ± 1.05
For a fixed df, increasing K generally improves accuracy. However, the critical comparison is between configurations
with equivalent total detection events but different (df, K) allocations. This tests our theoretical prediction: when
K > 1, the effective feature space of size df × K was not fully optimized during training, since only df independent
features were learned.
Fig. A8 presents this comparison directly, plotting test accuracy against total number of detections df × K. The
results validate our prediction: at the same total detection budget, configurations with larger df (and correspondingly
smaller K) consistently outperform those with smaller df and repeated measurements. For example, at approximately
30 total detections, (df = 10, K = 3) substantially outperforms (df = 6, K = 5) and (df = 3, K = 10). This confirms
38
Fig. A8. Multi-shot evaluation validates df scaling over K scaling. Test accuracy versus total number of
detections (df × K). Different curves correspond to models trained with different feature dimensions
df ∈{3, 4, 6, 10, 16, 24, 32}, as indicated in the legend. Points along each curve correspond to increasing K (1, 2, 3, 5)
from left to right. At the same total detection budget, larger df with smaller K consistently achieves higher accuracy
than smaller df with larger K. Dot points show mean values computed over 100 repetitions; error bars indicate
standard deviation.
that each independently optimized feature extracts unique task-relevant information, whereas repeated measurements
of the same feature merely refine an already-captured signal component.
One might note that the df = 16 curve appears to be close to the df = 24 curve in some regions. This reflects
the practical challenge of training PANS models: achieving good accuracy–photon tradeoffs requires careful hyperpa-
rameter tuning, and some configurations may be better optimized than others. The df = 16 model happened to be
particularly well-tuned in our experiments. Despite such variations, the overall trend clearly supports the theoretical
prediction that df scaling is more efficient than K scaling.
These results justify our choice to train and evaluate primarily at K = 1, which represents the most photon-efficient
operating regime (Appendix 5 D).
B.
Photon level scaling (η)
During training, the optimization determines an optimal photon level (Appendix 5 B) for each PANS model through
the accuracy–photon budget tradeoff controlled by α. Since this photon level has no absolute units, we define η = 1
as the trained operating point. We then vary η to examine how robust the models are to photon level variations.
This analysis serves two purposes. First, it characterizes robustness: in practical sensing scenarios, illumination
power may fluctuate due to source instability, objects may have varying reflectivity, or environmental conditions may
differ from training assumptions. Second, it explores whether we can operate at lower photon budgets than training
produced: by reducing η below 1, we attenuate the signal before detection and reduce the detected photon budget
Ndet, potentially achieving acceptable performance with fewer photons than the training-optimized level.
39
Fig. A9 shows test accuracy versus η for different df configurations. The curves exhibit a peak near η = 1, confirming
that the trained models are indeed optimized for this photon level. As η decreases below 1, accuracy degrades gracefully
over a substantial range before dropping sharply at very low η values where detection probabilities become negligibly
small. As η increases above 1, accuracy also decreases—this may seem counterintuitive, but reflects that the learned
illumination patterns were optimized for specific detection probability distributions, and simply increasing photon
counts does not improve (and can degrade) the feature discrimination learned during training.
Fig. A9. Effect of photon level scaling η. Test accuracy versus photon scaling parameter η for trained PANS
models with different feature dimensions df ∈{3, 4, 6, 10, 16, 24, 32}, as indicated in the legend. The horizontal axis
uses logarithmic scale spanning η ∈[10−2, 102]. All models achieve peak accuracy near η = 1 (the trained operating
point) and degrade for both lower and higher η values. Dot points show mean values computed over 100 repetitions;
error bars indicate standard deviation.
The graceful degradation for η < 1 has practical implications: it suggests that models trained at one photon level
can maintain useful performance when operated at moderately lower photon budgets, providing flexibility without
requiring retraining for every specific condition. However, this flexibility is limited—at very low η, all models converge
toward random-guess performance as insufficient photons are available for any meaningful discrimination.
This robustness to photon level variation has practical implications beyond simply enabling lower-photon opera-
tion. In real sensing scenarios, illumination power may fluctuate due to source instability, objects may have varying
reflectivity, or environmental conditions may differ from training assumptions. The ability to maintain performance
across a range of effective photon levels provides important operational flexibility without requiring retraining for
every specific condition.
C.
Dark count rate (DCR)
Dark counts are often the first technical concern for single-photon detection (SPD) applications—and potentially
a showstopper for low-light sensing. If PANS cannot tolerate realistic dark count levels, its practical utility would be
severely limited regardless of its photon efficiency.
40
Dark counts in single-photon detectors arise from thermal excitation, afterpulsing, and other detector-intrinsic
noise sources. For sensing applications more broadly, functionally equivalent effects arise from ambient light leakage,
thermal background radiation, stray reflections, and other environmental sources. We use “dark count rate” (DCR)
to encompass all such contributions: any process that triggers detection events independently of the signal being
measured.
We model DCR by adding independent Poisson-distributed counts to the signal detection. Specifically, for each
detector, we sample from Poisson(λdark) and add the result to the detection outcome.
Fig. A10 shows how test
accuracy varies with DCR across different df configurations. PANS maintains strong performance at DCR levels up
to approximately 0.1 (10% of the signal level), which exceeds typical values in well-designed single-photon detection
systems. Beyond this point, accuracy degrades more rapidly as noise begins to overwhelm the signal.
Fig. A10. Robustness to dark counts. Test accuracy versus dark count rate (expected dark counts per
detector per measurement) for different feature dimensions df ∈{3, 4, 6, 10, 16, 24, 32} at η = 1, as indicated in the
legend. The horizontal axis uses logarithmic scale. Accuracy degrades gradually up to DCR ∼0.1 and more rapidly
at higher DCR values. Dot points show mean values computed over 100 repetitions; error bars indicate standard
deviation.
This dark count tolerance is consistently observed across the various sensing tasks reported in this work, where we
explicitly evaluate performance under multiple DCR conditions. The combination of η robustness (to photon-level
variations) and DCR tolerance (to background noise) establishes that PANS can operate reliably under realistic,
non-ideal conditions—a prerequisite for any practical sensing system.
41
Appendix 8.
PARADIGM COMPARISON IN NUMERICAL SIMULATION
Appendix 2 established a conceptual taxonomy of sensing approaches based on three design decisions: whether
to apply pre-detection optical transformations, whether to optimize them for the task, and whether to model the
stochastic detection process during training. That section argued that when the detection bottleneck becomes sig-
nificant, photon-aware methods should outperform alternatives by optimizing against the true physical constraints
rather than approximations.
Here we validate these arguments through numerical simulation on FashionMNIST, systematically comparing the
four paradigms summarized in Table A1: direct imaging, fixed optical transformations, conventional end-to-end
optimization (non-PA E2E), and PANS. For each approach, we evaluate classification accuracy across a range of
photon budgets Ndet, revealing how performance degrades as the detection bottleneck tightens.
A.
Direct imaging
In direct imaging, the detector array captures the spatial intensity distribution without optical preprocessing. A
digital classifier then processes the recorded frame. This paradigm is standard in computer vision, where photon
counts are typically high enough that detection introduces negligible information loss.
Simulation protocol
We apply a uniform scaling factor η to all test images: for an image with pixel transmissions {xj}, the expected
photon count at pixel j is λj = η · xj. Each pixel independently undergoes Poisson sampling to simulate shot noise,
yielding a detected count nj ∼Poisson(λj). The resulting frame {nj} is normalized and fed to the classifier.
Since different images have different total transmissions P
j xj, a given η produces different total detected photon
counts for different images. To characterize the operating point with a single number, we report Ndet as the average
total detected photons across the test set.
By sweeping η, we obtain performance curves parameterized by this
average Ndet.
For the illumination budget Nillu, we assume uniform illumination across all pixels—the standard
imaging configuration where each pixel receives equal incident optical power.
Our simulation considers only fundamental photon shot noise, excluding detector dark counts, readout noise,
ambient light, and other practical degradation mechanisms. The resulting frames represent an idealized best case: the
maximum information that direct imaging could preserve at any given Ndet. Realistic implementations with practical
considerations would perform worse. The gap between PANS and direct imaging shown in main text Fig. 2 is therefore
conservative.
We use an AlexNet-style convolutional neural network (5 convolutional layers followed by fully-connected layers)
trained on clean (high-Ndet) images to report the test accuracy. This choice reflects a practical consideration: we
cannot exhaustively search for the optimal digital classifier architecture at every Ndet value, nor is this our focus.
Convolutional neural networks are well-understood and sufficient to extract class-discriminative information survives
the detection process, although better models exist (e.g., Vision Transformers). When information is severely degraded
at detection, more sophisticated architectures might yield modest improvements at any given operating point, but the
42
fundamental trend—accuracy collapsing as Ndet decreases—would remain. We develop this insight in the following
subsection.
T-shirt/top
Ndet = 106
Ndet = 103
Ndet = 102
Ndet = 10
Coat
Sandal
Shirt
Pullover
Dress
Trouser
Bag
Ankle Boot
Sneaker
Fig. A11. Shot-noise-limited frames at different photon budgets. Each row shows the same test image
captured at decreasing average Ndet (left to right: 106, 103, 102, 10). For Ndet ≤103, three independent samples are
shown to illustrate stochastic variation. Class-discriminative features are progressively destroyed by shot noise. At
low photon counts, even human observers cannot reliably identify the object category.
43
Visualizing information loss
The claim that information is “lost at detection” may seem abstract. Here we make it concrete through direct visual
inspection of the captured frames, leveraging a simple but powerful principle: if a human observer cannot distinguish
between classes by looking at the frames, it is evident that the discriminative information is gone.
This principle deserves elaboration. The human visual system, evolved over millions of years, is remarkably adept
at pattern recognition—often outperforming sophisticated algorithms on tasks involving noisy or degraded images.
When trained observers consistently fail to identify objects in captured frames, this constitutes strong evidence that
the frames genuinely lack the information needed for classification. The limitation is not in the observer’s skill but in
the data itself. Just as any digital classifier, no matter how advanced, can only extract information that exists in its
input; it cannot recover information that was never captured.
Fig. A11 shows example frames at different photon budgets for all 10 FashionMNIST classes. At Ndet = 106, frames
are visually identical to ground truth—every detail is preserved, and classification is trivial. As Ndet decreases, shot
noise progressively corrupts the spatial structure. At Ndet = 103, fine details are lost, though overall shape remains
discernible. The three independent samples per image shown in the figure illustrate the stochastic variation at this
photon level. At Ndet = 102, fine details are lost and the variation between samples of the same image becomes
substantial—a “pullover” might plausibly be a “shirt” or “coat,”, a “sandal” might be a “sneaker” or “ankle boot.”
At Ndet = 10, frames reduce to sparse, random-looking dot patterns bearing no visible resemblance to the original
objects—one cannot tell whether the original was clothing, footwear, or a bag.
This visual inspection reveals something important: the difficulty is not uniform across classes. Categories with
similar silhouettes—such as “pullover” versus “shirt,” or “sneaker” versus “ankle boot”—become indistinguishable
at higher Ndet than categories with distinct shapes like “trouser” or “bag.” This observation will resurface in our
experimental results (Appendix 13), where confusion matrices show elevated error rates between precisely these
visually similar categories.
The frames at low Ndet also illustrate why no classifier can rescue the situation. Consider the Ndet = 10 frames:
the detected photons are so sparse that the frames from different images of the same class look as different from each
other as frames from different classes. There is simply no consistent pattern that a classifier could learn to exploit.
The information has been destroyed by the stochastic detection process, not by any deficiency in the classification
algorithm.
To move beyond simple visual intuition, we employ t-SNE dimensionality reduction [29]. For each of the 10,000
test images, we generate 3 independent shot-noise-limited frames at the target Ndet, yielding 30,000 frame vectors
of dimension 784.
The t-SNE algorithm projects these high-dimensional vectors into 2D while preserving local
neighborhood structure, allowing us to visualize whether frames from the same class cluster together or scatter
indiscriminately. Fig. A12 illustrates this procedure and representative embeddings at three different photon budgets
spanning the transition from well-preserved to completely destroyed class structure.
At Ndet = 106, the 10 FashionMNIST classes form distinct, well-separated clusters—the frames preserve enough
information that same-class frames are far more similar to each other than to frames from other classes. At Ndet = 102,
cluster boundaries blur and substantial overlap appears.
By Ndet = 10, the embedding collapses into a single
undifferentiated blob: frames from all classes are statistically interchangeable. The t-SNE embedding cannot find
44
c
Image 1
Sample 1
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
Sample 2
Image 2
Image 3
Image 4
Samples
b
Test images (10,000 in total)
Ndet = 102
Image 1
Sample 1
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
Sample 2
Image 2
Image 3
Image 4
Samples
a Ndet = 106
Test images (10,000 in total)
Image 1
Sample 1
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
Sample 2
Image 2
Image 3
Image 4
Samples
Ndet = 10
t-SNE Dim 1
t-SNE Dim 2
t-SNE Dim 1
t-SNE Dim 2
t-SNE Dim 1
t-SNE Dim 2
Test images (10,000 in total)
Fig. A12. t-SNE visualization of information loss. Each panel shows the procedure and resulting embedding
at a different Ndet: each test image (10,000 total) is sampled 3 times at the target photon budget, and all 30,000
resulting vectors are projected via t-SNE. Points are colored by class label. a, Ndet = 106: well-separated clusters
indicate preserved class structure. b, Ndet = 102: clusters overlap as shot noise corrupts discriminative features.
c, Ndet = 10: class structure is entirely lost; the embedding collapses into an undifferentiated distribution.
45
structure because there is no structure to find.
This visualization reinforces the central point: the performance degradation we observe is not a failure of the
classifier but a fundamental loss of information at the detection stage. The frames simply do not contain the in-
formation needed for classification. For quantitative information-theoretic metrics confirming this picture, we refer
to main text Fig. 2C, which shows mutual information (MI) and Fisher discriminant ratio (FDR) as functions of
Ndet. Both metrics decline sharply below Ndet ∼104, consistent with these visualizations. This confirms the intuition
from Appendix 2: without any optical transformation to concentrate information, direct imaging is vulnerable to the
detection bottleneck.
B.
Fixed optical transformations
Physical objects are spatially continuous: any measurement system necessarily projects this continuous distribution
onto a finite set of detectors. Standard imaging performs this projection through pixelization—binning the continuous
light field into discrete spatial regions. When pixel resolution is sufficiently fine, this binning is assumed to preserve
all information relevant for downstream tasks.
The simplest modification to direct imaging is spatial binning: summing adjacent pixels to reduce the measurement
dimensionality from dobj to some smaller df. While straightforward, this approach discards high-frequency spatial
information that may carry discriminative features.
More generally, one can apply arbitrary linear transformations before detection.
Compressive sensing [30, 31]
formalizes this idea: rather than localized measurements (pixels), each detector integrates a weighted combination of
the entire input field. With appropriate measurement patterns, compressive sensing can capture signal information
more efficiently than direct imaging, particularly for signals with sparse structure.
As discussed in Appendix 2, fixed transformations are fundamentally limited because they cannot adapt to the
specific sensing task. The patterns are chosen a priori without knowledge of which features matter for the downstream
objective. We therefore expect fixed transformations to underperform learned approaches, and indeed this gap is large
enough that we did not include fixed transformations in the main text comparisons. Nevertheless, showing explicit
results provides useful context.
Compressive sensing: implementation and results
Compressive sensing requires random or structured measurement patterns. We implemented random binary patterns
as a representative example: each element of the measurement matrix W ∈Rdf×dobj is independently set to 0 or 1 with
equal probability. This is a standard choice in the compressive sensing literature; other pattern families (Hadamard,
Gaussian, etc.) exhibit qualitatively similar behavior.
We trained the digital back end (CNN classifier) on clean measurements (high photon budget) to isolate the
representational capacity of the fixed patterns from photon noise effects. Testing then proceeds across different Ndet
values using η scaling, identical to the PANS evaluation protocol. Fig. A13 shows training curves for different df
values, confirming that the classifiers successfully learn from the compressive measurements when photon counts are
abundant.
46
a
b
Fig. A13. Training compressive sensing classifiers. Training loss (left) and accuracy (right) versus epoch for
random binary patterns at different df values. Models are trained on clean (high photon count) measurements.
Fig. A14. Compressive sensing performance. Test accuracy (%) as a function of number of patterns (df,
rows) and photon budget (Ndet, columns). Performance collapses in the few-photon regime regardless of df.
Results
Fig. A14 presents test accuracy as a function of both df and Ndet. At high photon budgets (Ndet = 106), larger df
yields better accuracy, reaching ∼75% with df = 64. This makes sense: more measurements capture more information
about the object, and with abundant photons, detection noise is negligible.
However, performance collapses uniformly in the few-photon regime.
At Ndet ≤100, accuracy remains near
random guessing (10%) for all df values tested. Increasing df does not help—in fact, spreading a fixed photon budget
across more detectors reduces the signal per detector. The fundamental issue is that fixed patterns cannot adapt to
concentrate photons on task-relevant features. Without knowing which spatial locations matter for classification, the
47
measurement patterns waste photons on uninformative regions.
This result highlights the limitation of fixed transformations: compression alone is insufficient. Even though com-
pressive sensing reduces the measurement dimensionality, the choice of which linear combinations to measure critically
determines performance. Random patterns, while mathematically convenient, have no mechanism to prioritize dis-
criminative features over irrelevant ones.
This motivates learning the measurement patterns through end-to-end
optimization, which we examine next.
C.
Conventional end-to-end optimization
The natural progression from fixed transformations is to learn the measurement patterns through end-to-end opti-
mization, adapting them to the specific task. This approach—optimizing the optical front-end jointly with the digital
back-end—has been extensively explored in computational imaging and optical neural networks [18, 32–34].
To isolate the contribution of photon-aware modeling, we compare PANS against conventional end-to-end opti-
mization where illumination patterns are learned but the stochastic single-photon detection process is not explicitly
modeled during training.
This baseline uses the same network architecture as PANS: identical optical front end
(learned illumination patterns) and digital back end (MLP with 512 hidden units). The key difference lies solely at
the detection stage: conventional end-to-end optimization usually employs deterministic expected values rather than
stochastic sampling from the actual photon detection distribution. To improve noise resilience despite this deter-
ministic approximation, we applied quantization-aware training (QAT) [12, 13], a standard technique that trains the
model to be robust against realistic noise at inference time.
Training and evaluation
We trained conventional end-to-end models across df ∈{3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 16, 24, 32, 64}. For each trained model, we
evaluated performance by sweeping η to trace out continuous accuracy–Ndet curves (Appendix 5). The illumination
photon budget Nillu is computed identically to PANS: the sum of all illumination pattern elements.
Fig. A15 shows test accuracy versus Ndet for different df values, with the thick curve indicating the envelope
(maximum accuracy across all df at each Ndet), corresponding to the green curve in main text Fig. 2E.
Conventional end-to-end optimization substantially outperforms both direct imaging and compressive sensing. At
high photon budgets (Ndet ≳5000), accuracy approaches ∼83%, comparable to PANS. The learned patterns success-
fully capture task-relevant features, and with sufficient photons, the detection process introduces minimal information
loss.
However, performance degrades as Ndet decreases. This degradation is more gradual than compressive sensing but
still substantial, and a significant gap versus PANS emerges in the few-photon regime: at Ndet ∼5, conventional end-
to-end achieves only ∼15–20% accuracy while PANS achieves ∼70% (Fig. 2E, Fig. 3A in the main text; Fig. A29). The
learned patterns provide considerable benefit over untrained patterns, but without explicit modeling of the stochastic
detection process, the optimization cannot fully account for how photon noise corrupts measurements at test time.
This gap emerges precisely in the regime where detection stochasticity dominates. This validates the third decision in
our taxonomy (Appendix 2; Fig. A1): task-specific optimization helps, but photon-aware modeling becomes essential
48
Fig. A15. Conventional end-to-end optimization results. Test accuracy versus Ndet for different df (light to
dark curves). The thick curve shows the envelope—maximum accuracy at each Ndet across all df—corresponding to
the green curve in main text Fig. 2E.
when detection is highly stochastic.
Both approaches learn task-adapted measurement patterns, but only PANS
trains against the true physical detection process under extreme few-photon conditions, especially for Ndet ≲10. This
difference becomes critical when every photon matters: PANS learns to allocate photons to maximize information
flow through the exact photon detection bottleneck, while conventional approaches optimize against an approximation
that diverges from reality at such low photon counts.
D.
Summary
The comparisons in this section establish a clear hierarchy. Direct imaging preserves full spatial information but
suffers catastrophic degradation when shot noise corrupts pixel values (Appendix 8 A). Fixed transformations (used
compressive sensing for demonstration) reduce dimensionality but cannot adapt to the task, collapsing to random
guessing in the few-photon regime Appendix 8 B. Conventional end-to-end optimization learns task-relevant patterns
and outperforms fixed approaches, but without modeling the stochastic detection process, it cannot fully optimize in
few-photon regime (Appendix 8 C).
PANS addresses this gap by incorporating photon-aware modeling of single-photon detection directly into the
training loop.
The stochastic forward pass and gradient estimation enable the optimizer to learn patterns that
maximize information preservation through the detection bottleneck—not just for an idealized model, but for the
actual physical process that will actually occur at test time.
49
Appendix 9.
ACTIVE PANS: ADDITIONAL TASKS
The previous sections focused on FashionMNIST to develop the methodology in detail. Here we present numerical
simulation results for the remaining active PANS tasks reported in the main text: MNIST digit classification, cell-
organelle classification, and barcode identification. These tasks demonstrate the generality of the PANS framework
across different sensing scenarios, from standard benchmarks to application-specific challenges.
A.
MNIST digit classification
MNIST handwritten digit recognition is a foundational benchmark in machine learning, widely used for validating
new methods and hardware platforms due to its simplicity and interpretability. Reporting results for this task helps
us to compare PANS to many existing work [12, 35–37]. The dataset consists of 28×28 grayscale images of digits 0–9,
with 60,000 training and 10,000 test images. Compared to FashionMNIST, MNIST presents a simpler classification
task with more distinct class boundaries, providing a complementary test of PANS performance.
Training followed the procedure detailed in Appendix 6. The digital back-end is a two-layer MLP: df →512 →10.
We trained models with df ∈{4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 64}. This choice of squared numbers was motivated by potential spatial
multiplexing arrangements in hardware implementation, though the specific values do not qualitatively affect the
results. Table A5 shows test accuracy across different (df, K) configurations, evaluated on 200 test images with 100
repetitions per configuration.
Table A5. Test accuracy (%) on MNIST for different feature dimensions df and shot counts K. Each entry shows
mean ± standard deviation over 100 trials.
K = 1
K = 2
K = 3
K = 5
df = 4
60.28 ± 2.08
64.15 ± 1.92
65.38 ± 1.49
67.03 ± 1.60
df = 9
81.23 ± 2.03
85.59 ± 1.72
86.93 ± 1.27
88.49 ± 1.21
df = 16
89.96 ± 1.42
92.32 ± 1.37
93.11 ± 1.11
93.42 ± 0.89
df = 25
94.39 ± 1.35
96.35 ± 0.97
96.88 ± 0.69
97.20 ± 0.66
df = 36
97.28 ± 0.98
98.20 ± 0.77
98.47 ± 0.68
98.63 ± 0.56
df = 64
98.46 ± 0.75
99.20 ± 0.54
99.40 ± 0.45
99.52 ± 0.38
B.
Cell-organelle classification
Cell-organelle classification addresses a practical flow cytometry application where cells must be rapidly categorized
based on their internal structure. This task is directly relevant to biomedical imaging, where both low illumination
power (to minimize photodamage to living cells) and fast detection (to achieve high throughput in sorting applications)
are essential constraints.
We use cell images derived from the dataset of Ref. [38], with four categories based on the dominant visible organelle:
membrane, nucleolus, mitochondria, and a “null” class representing empty fields of view (no cell present). Each image
is 100×100 grayscale pixels, with 10,000 training images and 1,000 test images per class. Fig. A16 shows representative
examples randomly sampled from the test set.
50
Fig. A16. Cell-organelle classification dataset. Images randomly sampled from the test set, representing
category: membrane, nucleolus, and mitochondria. Category labels are shown above each image.
51
The digital back-end is a three-layer MLP: df →512 →512 →4. Training follows the same procedure as previous
tasks. We evaluated performance across different df values and dark count rates (DCR) to assess robustness under
realistic noise conditions.
Results are shown in main text Fig. 4B. Each data point reports the mean and standard deviation over 100
repetitions. Active PANS achieves ∼90% accuracy with ∼5 detected photons while maintaining robustness to DCR
levels up to 10%, demonstrating practical viability for photon-sensitive biological applications.
C.
Barcode “1010” identification
The barcode identification task tests pattern recognition at arbitrary spatial locations—a challenge distinct from
global image classification. The goal is to determine whether a 10-bin barcode segment contains the target sequence
“1010” at any position.
Inputs are binary barcodes of length 10 (i.e., dobj = 10), with 4,000 training samples and 1,000 test samples.
The task is binary classification: positive examples contain the “1010” pattern somewhere within the 10 bars, while
negative examples do not. This task is nontrivial because the target pattern can appear at multiple positions and
must be distinguished from similar sequences. Fig. A17 shows example inputs from both classes.
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
0 0
1
1
Fig. A17. Barcode “1010” identification dataset. Example 10-element barcode segments randomly sampled
from the test set. Positive examples (checkmark) contain the “1010” pattern at some position (highlighted in green
box). Negative examples (cross) do not contain the target pattern. The pattern can appear at any location within
the segment, requiring position-invariant feature detection.
The digital back-end uses a single hidden layer: df →512 →2. Results are shown in main text Fig. 4E, with each
52
data point reporting mean and standard deviation over 100 repetitions across different DCR values.
This task illustrates an important point: PANS’s advantage does not arise solely from dimensionality reduction.
Unlike image classification where df ≪dobj, here the number of detectors df can exceed the input dimension dobj =
10. Yet PANS still dramatically outperforms direct imaging at equivalent photon budgets. The advantage comes
from learning illumination patterns that extract task-relevant features—in this case, patterns sensitive to the “1010”
sequence regardless of position—rather than from dimension reduction. Active PANS achieves near-perfect accuracy
(>99%) with only ∼5 detected photons, a regime where direct imaging fails entirely.
53
Appendix 10.
PASSIVE PANS: DIVERSE SENSING APPLICATIONS
Active PANS controls the illumination patterns projected onto objects, optimizing how we probe the scene. Many
sensing scenarios, however, involve optical signals from sources we cannot control—scattered light through turbid
media, astronomical observations, monitoring reflected or transmitted light from passive objects.
Passive PANS
addresses these scenarios by applying learnable transformations to the incoming optical field before detection.
Appendix 4 detailed the mathematical formulation and training procedure for passive PANS with linear optical
processors. For the demonstrations in this section, we use coherent optical encoders with real-valued transmission
matrices W—a choice motivated by experimental accessibility and compatibility with established optical platforms,
as discussed in Appendix 4 A. The detected intensity is the squared magnitude of the transformed field (Eq. 18), and
training follows the same photon-aware framework as active PANS.
This section presents numerical simulation results across five passive sensing tasks shown in main text Fig. 5. Unlike
the active PANS demonstrations which focused on classification, passive PANS also demonstrates image reconstruc-
tion—recovering spatial structure from scattered light with only a handful of detected photons. This reconstruction
capability highlights the broader applicability of the framework beyond categorical inference, showing that PANS can
preserve rich information through the detection bottleneck.
All results are from numerical simulation; each data point reports mean and standard deviation over 100 repetitions.
For direct imaging baselines, we use an AlexNet-style CNN classifier. Dark count rates (DCR) are varied to assess
robustness under realistic noise conditions.
A.
MNIST through multimode fiber: classification and reconstruction
Multimode fibers (MMFs) scramble spatial information through mode mixing, transforming coherent input images
into seemingly random speckle patterns at the output.
This presents a challenging sensing scenario: the spatial
structure of the original image is encoded in the complex interference pattern of the speckle, requiring either careful
calibration or learned decoding to recover useful information.
We simulate MMF propagation using a random unitary scattering matrix that transforms input field amplitudes
into output speckle patterns. The passive PANS encoder then applies a learnable linear transformation to this speckle
before single-photon detection. Both classification (identifying which digit) and reconstruction (recovering the original
image) are demonstrated.
The input images of this task are the 28×28 grayscale speckle images transformed from the original MNIST digits
(see Fig. A18 and main text Fig. 5A). For classification, the digital back-end is a two-layer MLP (df →512 →10)
trained with df ∈{4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 16, 24, 32}; training was performed with 60,000 images, and test accuracy is evaluated
on 10,000 images. For reconstruction, the digital back-end is a decoder network (df →512 →512 →784, reshaped to
28×28) trained with df ∈{4, 6, 8, 10, 32, 64}; reconstruction quality is measured by structural similarity index (SSIM)
averaged over 10,000 test images. Fig. A18 illustrates the sensing pipeline and shows example results across different
configurations.
Classification results are shown in main text Fig. 5B. Passive PANS achieves ∼90% accuracy with only Ndet ∼10
photons, while direct imaging of the speckle patterns requires hundreds of photons to exceed 50%. This gap arises
54
MMF
...
Sample 1 Sample 2 Sample 3
df = 64, DCR 1%
Sample 1 Sample 2 Sample 3
Sample 1 Sample 2 Sample 3
Speckle
image
Original
image
PANS 
encoder
df = 64, DCR  5%
df = 32, DCR 1%
Original
Reconstructed
Input
df 
detectors
Fig. A18. Image sensing through multimode fiber. Top: schematic showing original image →MMF
propagation →speckle pattern →PANS encoder →single-photon detection (SPD) →reconstruction. Bottom:
example results showing original MNIST digits (gray shade), corresponding speckle patterns after MMF propagation
(yellow shade), and reconstructed images from passive PANS at different configurations (df = 64 with DCR 1%,
df = 64 with DCR 5%, and df = 32 with DCR 1%). Three independent samples per digit demonstrate consistency
and variation across stochastic detection events. Spatial structure can be recovered even from apparently random
speckle at few-photon levels.
55
because direct speckle imaging distributes photons across the full spatial pattern, whereas the optimized passive
encoder concentrates detection into task-relevant features.
Reconstruction results are shown in main text Fig. 5C–D. Passive PANS achieves SSIM ∼0.7 with Ndet ∼10 pho-
tons. Reconstruction is inherently more demanding than classification: the system must preserve enough information
to recover spatial structure, not merely identify which of 10 categories applies. Nevertheless, meaningful image recov-
ery is possible in regimes where direct imaging produces only noise. This demonstrates that PANS can also preserve
rich, continuous information through the detection bottleneck, not just categorical distinctions.
B.
Transient event detection
Transient event detection involves identifying brief objects appearing against a fluctuating background. This sce-
nario is relevant to diverse applications: contamination monitoring in cleanrooms, defect detection on moving conveyor
belts, pest identification in food processing, and security perimeter surveillance. The challenge is that the transient
signal contributes minimal energy compared to background fluctuations—the signal is “buried” in noise.
We use synthetic data where transient objects (small patterns) appear briefly against a spatially varying, noisy
background. Fig. A19 shows example frames with mean pixel intensity annotated. The annotated mean values reveal
why this task is nontrivial: the mean pixel intensity of transient-present frames overlaps substantially with transient-
absent frames due to background variability. Simple intensity thresholding cannot distinguish the cases. Successful
detection requires learning the spatial distribution characteristic of transient events—precisely what the optimized
passive encoder achieves by concentrating photons onto discriminative spatial features.
The images are 64×64 grayscale, with 4,000 training and 1,000 test samples. The digital back-end is a two-layer
MLP (df →512 →2) trained with df ∈{2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10}. Results are shown in main text Fig. 5E. Passive PANS
achieves >95% detection accuracy with only a few detected photons, while direct imaging fails because the transient
signal is indistinguishable from background fluctuations without optimized feature extraction.
C.
Tissue blood flow detection
Laser speckle contrast imaging detects blood flow by exploiting the temporal dynamics of scattered light: perfused
tissue with flowing blood produces rapidly fluctuating speckle (appearing blurred in time-averaged images), while
static ischemic tissue produces stable, high-contrast speckle. This technique has clinical applications in monitoring
cerebral blood flow during neurosurgery, assessing burn depth, and evaluating tissue viability.
Conventional speckle contrast analysis requires sufficient photons to reliably estimate the speckle statistics. Passive
PANS offers the potential for perfusion assessment with dramatically reduced illumination—important for minimizing
tissue heating and enabling longer monitoring periods.
We use synthetic speckle images capturing the contrast difference between static and perfused tissue. More repre-
sentative examples highlighting the speckle contrast difference are shown in Fig. A20. Images are 64×64 grayscale,
with 4,000 training and 1,000 test samples per class. The digital back-end is a two-layer MLP (df →512 →2)
trained with df ∈{2, 3, 6, 8, 12, 16}. Results are shown in main text Fig. 5F. Passive PANS enables reliable perfusion
classification with photon budgets far below what conventional speckle contrast analysis would require.
56
Fig. A19. Transient event detection dataset. Example frames showing background-only (gray border) and
transient-present (green border) cases. The mean pixel intensity is annotated above each frame. The similar mean
values across both classes demonstrate that simple intensity thresholding cannot distinguish transient events,
inferring that detection requires learning the spatial signature of the transient against background fluctuations.
57
Fig. A20. Tissue speckle imaging dataset. Images randomly sampled from the test set, showing static tissue
(gray border) with high speckle contrast versus perfused tissue (green border) with reduced speckle contrast due to
blood flow. The mean pixel intensity is annotated above each frame. Classification performance relies on speckle
texture analysis—the contrast difference between sharp (static) and blurred (perfused) patterns—rather than
intensity measurements.
58
D.
Compact nebula classification
Astronomical imaging frequently operates in photon-starved conditions due to the vast distances to celestial objects
and the faintness of many sources. Compact nebula classification—distinguishing planetary nebulae (shells ejected
by dying stars) from emission nebulae (illuminated interstellar gas clouds)—exemplifies a task where morphological
features must be extracted from extremely limited photon budgets. These objects are typically observed through
narrowband filters (Hα, [OIII], etc.) that isolate specific emission lines, providing quasi-monochromatic light suitable
for coherent processing. Their compact angular sizes (arcseconds to arcminutes) produce spatially coherent wavefronts
at the telescope aperture.
We use synthetic nebula images capturing the morphological differences between classes (Fig. A21). Images are
64×64 grayscale, with 4,000 training and 1,000 test samples per class. The digital back-end is a two-layer MLP (df →
1024 →2, larger hidden layer due to the subtler class distinctions). We trained models with df ∈{2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12}.
Results are shown in main text Fig. 5G. Passive PANS achieves reliable classification with photon budgets represen-
tative of faint astronomical sources, demonstrating applicability to observational astronomy.
E.
Fiber end-face inspection
The final demonstration addresses surface anomaly detection—identifying localized defects, contamination, or tran-
sient features against an otherwise expected background.
We use optical fiber end-face inspection as a concrete
example: detecting surface contamination (debris, scratches, dust, residue) that can degrade optical transmission
quality. Clean fiber ends show uniform, predictable patterns; contaminated ends exhibit localized intensity anomalies
(Fig. A22). The images are 64×64 grayscale, with 4,000 training and 1,000 test samples (clean vs. contaminated).
The digital back-end is a two-layer MLP (df →512 →2) trained with df ∈{2, 3, 4, 5, 8}. Results are shown in main
text Fig. 5H.
This toy-model application may be relevant to telecommunications infrastructure, laboratory optical systems, and
precision manufacturing quality control. A possibly useful application of passive PANS for this type of application
is enabling continuous inline monitoring: by tapping only a minimal fraction of the transmitted signal, anomalies
can be detected without disrupting primary operation. One might imagine similar approaches finding use in other
contexts, such as semiconductor wafer inspection, detecting minute periodic dimming in stellar light curves, or general
industrial surface monitoring. In each case, the core challenge is the same: extract a weak, localized signal against
background variation using minimal optical resources. Passive PANS provides a unified framework for optimizing this
extraction.
F.
Summary and outlook
Across the tasks presented here, we found that passive PANS consistently outperformed direct imaging baselines at
low photon budgets, maintained reasonable performance when tested below the training photon regime, and tolerated
realistic dark count rates without severe degradation. The image reconstruction results are worth noting separately,
as they suggest the framework can preserve continuous spatial information through the detection bottleneck, not just
59
Fig. A21. Nebula classification dataset. Images randomly sampled from the test set, showing planetary
nebulae (green border), characterized by roughly circular or ring-like morphology from expanding stellar ejecta,
versus emission nebulae (gray border), showing more irregular structure from illuminated interstellar medium. The
mean pixel intensity is annotated above each frame. The overlapping intensity distributions demonstrate that
classification requires morphological analysis, not simple photometry.
60
Fig. A22. Fiber end-face inspection dataset. Images randomly sampled from the test set, showing clean fiber
ends (gray border) with uniform transmission versus contaminated fiber ends (green border) with debris, scratches,
or surface damage causing localized intensity variations. The mean pixel intensity is annotated above each frame.
Detecting contamination requires identifying localized anomalies against the fiber’s baseline profile, not intensity
thresholding.
61
categorical labels.
We emphasize that the coherent linear encoders used throughout this section represent one particular choice, selected
because such transformations are already well-established in optical hardware. Other front-end implementations—
complex-valued transformations, intensity-based encoders for incoherent sources, nonlinear optical operations, or even
quantum optical states and novel sensing materials—could in principle be incorporated, though we did not explore
these directions here.
The passive PANS demonstrations in this section complement the active PANS results of Appendix 9, together
illustrating the flexibility of the photon-aware optimization framework. As discussed in Appendix 1 E, the PANS
framework is agnostic to the specific optical front end—what matters is the detection bottleneck, where physical
signals are converted to digital data with inevitable information loss under photon constraints. Any programmable
optical transformation before this bottleneck can be optimized using the same methodology. Active illumination and
passive linear encoding are simply two concrete instantiations: they share the same optimization target (maximizing
information flow through the detection bottleneck) while differing only in the physical implementation of the front
end.
The consistent results we observed across our test cases are encouraging, and we hope these demonstrations provide
a useful reference point for researchers interested in adapting similar ideas to their own sensing platforms.
62
Part III:
Experimental implementation
Appendix 11.
STRUCTURED ILLUMINATION PLATFORM
We implemented active PANS using an incoherent optical system that projects programmable illumination patterns
onto an object plane and performs single-photon detection of the transmitted light. The hardware is adapted from a
setup previously used for optical neural network inference [9, 12]; here we repurpose it as an active sensing platform.
We summarize the key components and their roles; detailed characterization can be found in the earlier works.
A.
System overview
Fig. A23 shows photographs and a schematic rendering of the apparatus. The system consists of three functional
stages corresponding to the active PANS pipeline: (1) a programmable organic light-emitting diode (OLED) display
encoding the learned illumination patterns {⃗wi}, (2) a spatial light modulator (SLM) serving as the object plane
where illumination interacts with the sample, and (3) a quantitative scientific CMOS (qCMOS) camera performing
single-photon detection. As illustrated by the light path in Fig. A23a, light propagates from the OLED through a
zoom lens system to the SLM, then through polarization optics and spectral filtering before reaching the camera.
B.
Programmable illumination source
The OLED display is taken from a commercial smartphone (Google Pixel 2016), providing 1920 × 1080 pixels with
individually controllable intensity. We use only the green sub-pixels (λ ≈532 nm), arranged in a square lattice with
57.5 µm pitch. The OLED’s high extinction ratio and true black pixels enable high dynamic range modulation; after
calibration, approximately 7-bit linear intensity control (124 levels) is achieved per pixel [12].
A zoom lens system (Resolv4K, Navitar) images the OLED onto the object plane, with magnification adjusted to
provide one-to-one correspondence between OLED pixels and SLM pixels. Spatial uniformity across OLED pixels is
characterized and corrected during calibration, ensuring consistent intensity output across the display region used in
experiments.
C.
Object plane and intensity modulation
For controlled experimental validation, we emulate object transmission using a reflective liquid-crystal SLM (Mead-
owlark P1920-500-1100-HDMI), which provides 1920 × 1152 pixels with 9.2 µm pitch. Combined with a half-wave
plate (HWP) and polarizing beam splitter (PBS), the SLM functions as a pixel-wise intensity modulator: incident
63
a
b
c
OLED display
(illumination patterns)
SLM
(object)
qCMOS camera
(photon detection)
Illumination pattern
on the OLED display
Sensing object
on the SLM
Results collected
by the photon detector
Fig. A23. Experimental apparatus for active PANS. a, Top-down photograph of the optical system with the
three main components highlighted: OLED display for programmable illumination patterns (green), SLM for object
emulation (white), and qCMOS camera for single-photon detection (yellow). Arrows indicate the light path from
illumination source through the object plane to the detector. b, Side-view photograph of the setup. c, Schematic
rendering illustrating the sensing pipeline: learned illumination patterns displayed on the OLED probe the object on
the SLM, and the transmitted light is measured by the photon detector to produce classification results.
horizontally-polarized light acquires a pixel-dependent polarization rotation, and the PBS selects the vertical com-
ponent, yielding intensity modulation with approximately 50:1 extinction ratio and 8-bit control resolution after
calibration.
Spatial uniformity across SLM pixels is similarly characterized and corrected. This configuration allows arbitrary
grayscale test images to be displayed as “objects” whose transmission we seek to classify.
D.
Single-photon detection
The intensity-modulated light is demagnified by a telescope (Navitar rear adapter + Olympus 4× objective) and
focused onto the qCMOS camera (Hamamatsu ORCA-Quest, C15550-20UP), which has 4096×2304 pixels with 4.6 µm
64
pitch.
The qCMOS operates in ultra-quiet photon-counting mode, where readout noise is suppressed below 0.3 photoelec-
trons, enabling detection of individual photon events. In this mode, each camera pixel functions as an independent
single-photon detector, directly outputting photon counts. At 532 nm, quantum efficiency is approximately 86% with
dark count rate ∼0.006 photoelectrons per pixel per second at −35°C. After accounting for detection imperfections,
the effective detection efficiency is ∼68% with effective dark count rate ∼0.01 photoelectrons per pixel per second.
Through optical fan-in, light from the object interaction region is focused onto a small area of the camera sensor
spanning a few pixels.
65
Appendix 12.
IMPLEMENTATION OF ACTIVE PANS
This section describes the experimental procedures for mapping trained PANS models to the optical hardware.
We implement active PANS for two classification tasks: FashionMNIST (10 clothing categories) and MNIST (10
handwritten digits), both using 28 × 28 pixel images. The PANS models deployed here are the same as evaluated in
Appendix 7.
A.
Normalization and parameter mapping
Test images from FashionMNIST and MNIST are displayed on the SLM as amplitude modulation patterns. Each
image ⃗x is normalized such that the maximum pixel value corresponds to maximum SLM transmission (1) and the
minimum to minimum transmission (0).
The trained illumination matrix W is similarly normalized so that the maximum element equals 1, corresponding
to maximum OLED pixel intensity. Converting this normalized value to actual detected photon numbers requires
calibration, described next.
B.
Photon level calibration
The critical calibration step establishes the scaling factor η (Appendix 5 B) that converts normalized parameter
values to expected detected photons. We fix the SLM to uniform maximum transmission and display random binary
patterns on the OLED, where each pixel is either dark (0) or at maximum intensity (1). Since the number of illuminated
pixels is known for each pattern, measuring the detected signal establishes the relationship between OLED pixel value
and detected photon number. Averaging over many random patterns yields robust calibration across the field of view,
accounting for any residual spatial nonuniformity.
This procedure determines the conversion factor from the normalized value “1” in the trained illumination patterns
to expected detected photons—precisely the η parameter that governs the operating photon budget.
C.
Spatial configuration
We use one-to-one pixel mapping with no macro-pixel binning: each OLED pixel encodes one element of the
illumination pattern, and each SLM pixel represents one pixel of the object. For both datasets, this corresponds to a
28 × 28 pixel region of interest on both devices.
This compact configuration serves two purposes. Maintaining a small region of interest reduces the effort required
to ensure spatial uniformity, as correcting nonuniformities such as aberrations through additional calibration often
comes at the cost of precision. Additionally, since PANS operates at single-photon levels, the available optical power
from the OLED is sufficient for individual pixels without requiring macro-pixel binning to accumulate signal.
66
D.
Detector configuration
Through optical fan-in via the objective lens, light from the entire 28×28 interaction region is focused onto a small
area of the camera sensor spanning a few pixels. We select a single pixel and calibrate the system around it; this same
pixel is used for all measurements, ensuring consistent detection characteristics throughout the experiment.
E.
Measurement protocol
For each test image ⃗x, we sequentially display the df trained illumination patterns {⃗w1, ⃗w2, . . . , ⃗wdf} on the OLED.
For each pattern, we acquire 30 independent single-shot measurements, recording the binary detection outcome (1 for
photon detected, 0 for no detection). Exposure times range from approximately 0.6 to 3 ms depending on the target
photon budget.
The 30 repeated measurements sample the same optical configuration multiple times, which is standard practice for
single-photon detection and allows characterization of the stochastic detection process. The complete measurement
for one test image yields a df × 30 matrix of binary values, representing 30 independent single-shot feature vectors
that can each be used for classification.
We evaluate 200 test images for each df configuration, yielding a total of 200 × df × 30 binary measurements per
configuration.
Appendix 13.
EVALUATION OF EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Following the measurement protocol described in Appendix 12, we now present the collected experimental data and
evaluate classification performance on FashionMNIST and MNIST.
A.
Visualization of collected SPD readouts
Fig. A24 displays representative examples of the binary detection data collected from the single-photon detector.
For each test image, the df binary values from one single-shot measurement are arranged into a grid for visualization:
an 8×4 grid for df = 32 or a 4×4 grid for df = 16, where each cell corresponds to one illumination pattern and shows
whether a photon was detected (white) or not (black). Results from different test images are shown across columns,
with different trials (repeated measurements of the same test image) shown across rows.
An interesting feature of these measurements is their high trial-to-trial variability. Even for the same input image
measured under identical conditions, the binary detection patterns differ substantially across the 30 repeated trials.
This is a direct consequence of the detection bottleneck in the few-photon regime: with expected detection counts
below one photon per pattern on average, each single-shot measurement is dominated by shot noise. This stochasticity
is not a limitation of our implementation but a fundamental physical constraint: with such limited photon budgets,
high signal-to-noise detection is simply not possible, and PANS is designed precisely to address this regime.
This behavior differs notably from conventional machine learning inference, which is typically deterministic: the
same input produces the same output. Here, the intrinsic randomness of photon detection at the detection bottleneck
67
a
t-SNE Dim 1
t-SNE Dim 2
Test images (200 in total)
df = 32
Trial 1
Trials (30 in total)
Image 1
Image 2
Image 3
Image 4 ...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
Trial 5
Trial 2
Trial 3
Trial 4
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
Trial 1
Image 1
Image 2
Image 3
Image 4
Trial 2
Trial 3
b
Test images (200 in total)
Trials (30 in total)
t-SNE Dim 1
t-SNE Dim 2
df = 16
Fig. A24. Experimentally collected single-photon detection data for FashionMNIST. a, Data for
df = 32: each 8 × 4 grid displays the binary detection outcomes from one single-shot measurement, with white
indicating photon detected and black indicating no detection. Columns correspond to different test images; rows
correspond to repeated trials of the same image. b, Data for df = 16: each 4 × 4 grid represents one measurement.
Right panels show t-SNE visualizations of the feature distributions across all test images, with colors indicating class
labels.
means that repeated measurements of the same object yield different feature vectors, and consequently may produce
different classification outcomes. At first glance, such variability might seem to preclude reliable sensing.
However, the t-SNE visualizations in the right panels of Fig. A24 reveal that task-relevant information remains well
preserved. Each point represents one single-shot feature vector, colored by the true class label of the corresponding
test image. Despite the apparent randomness of individual measurements, distinct class clusters emerge: feature
vectors from images of the same category cluster together, while different categories occupy separate regions of
the feature space (as in Fig. 2F in the main text and Fig. A12). This demonstrates that the optimized illumination
patterns successfully encode discriminative information into the statistics of photon detection. Even though any single
realization appears highly noisy due to the stochastic detection process, the underlying class structure is retained and
68
can be extracted by the digital back end. This is precisely what PANS achieves by optimizing the optical front end
to maximize information flow through the detection bottleneck.
B.
From feature vectors to classification
To obtain classification results, each single-shot feature vector is processed by the trained digital back end (MLP).
Fig. A25 illustrates this inference pipeline using df = 16 on FashionMNIST as a representative example.
Fig. A25a shows the inference diagram, following the same structure as Fig. 2D in the main text: the trained
illumination patterns {w1, w2, . . . , w16} sequentially probe the input image, single-photon detection produces a binary
feature vector (displayed as a 4 × 4 grid), and the digital classifier maps this to a 10-dimensional output vector where
each dimension corresponds to one class.
Fig. A25b displays six trials randomly sampled from the 30 repeated measurements of the same shirt image. The
feature frames vary visibly across trials due to the stochastic detection process, yet the corresponding output vectors
consistently peak at the correct class (Shirt) in most cases. Trial 5 produces an incorrect prediction (Coat), illustrating
that classification errors do occur—expected given the model accuracy of 77.2% for df = 16 (Table A6). This example
demonstrates the characteristic behavior of PANS inference: despite substantial variability in the raw detection data,
the jointly optimized system achieves correct classification in the majority of trials.
The output vectors also exhibit some variation in their numerical values across trials, though this variation is less
pronounced than in the raw feature frames. The digital back end maps the binary features into a learned representation
space, which partially stabilizes the outputs. Nevertheless, the variation is visible, and for classification what matters
is which dimension achieves the highest value rather than the exact magnitudes.
C.
Output distribution across trials
The six trials in Fig. A25b provide a glimpse of the inference behavior for one input image. To better characterize
the distribution of classifier outputs, Fig. A26 shows all 30 experimentally collected trials for several representative
test images at df = 16.
For each input image, all 30 output vectors are plotted with low opacity so that overlapping regions appear darker,
revealing the distribution across trials. Trouser shows a highly concentrated distribution: the correct class consistently
receives a high value while all others remain near zero. Categories with similar visual appearance show greater spread.
The shirt image has the correct class receiving the highest output in most trials, but with noticeable probability mass
at Coat and Pullover—consistent with the incorrect Coat prediction seen in Fig. A25b. Pullover and Coat similarly
show mutual confusion, while the footwear categories (Sandal, Sneaker, Ankle boot) exhibit overlap among themselves
as well.
These patterns preview the confusion structure quantified in the next subsection, where we aggregate results across
all 200 test images rather than examining individual examples.
69
a
Trial 1
Trial 2
Trial 3
Trial 4
Trial 5
Trial 6
Trial 1
Trial 2
Trial 3
Trial 4
Trial 5
Trial 6
Experimental
feature frame
Shirt?
Patterned
illumination
Input image
(Shirt)
Digital
Physical
SPD
w1
w2
w16
...
...
1
2
16
df =16
Shirt!
...
Repeated trials in time for the same input image (Shirt)
Experimental
feature frames
Output vectors through
digital back-end classiﬁer
b
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Coat?
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Shirt!
Fig. A25. Single-shot inference pipeline with experimental data. a, Diagram of the inference process
(compare to Fig. 2D in the main text): df = 16 trained illumination patterns probe the input image (a “Shirt” from
FashionMNIST), single-photon detection produces a 4 × 4 binary feature frame, and the digital back end outputs a
10-dimensional vector for classification. b, Six trials randomly sampled from the 30 repeated measurements of the
same input image. Left column: experimentally collected feature frames showing trial-to-trial variability. Right
column: corresponding output vectors from the digital classifier, with the predicted class indicated. Five of six trials
correctly predict “Shirt”; one trial (Trial 5) incorrectly predicts “Coat”.
70
...
Input test
images
Output vectors of trained PANS model
from experimentally collected SPD data
(df =16, 30 trials)
SPD
...
...
...
...
...
Trouser
Pullover
Coat
Shirt
Sandal
Ankle Boot
Fig. A26. Distribution of classifier outputs across 30 trials for representative test images. Each row
corresponds to one input image from FashionMNIST (with corresponding category labeled on the top). For each
image, the output vectors from all 30 experimentally implemented single-shot inferences (df = 16) are overlaid with
transparency to show the density of outputs across trials.
71
D.
Confusion matrices
The output distributions in Fig. A26 characterize the behavior for individual test images. To examine classification
performance across all test images, Fig. A27 and Fig. A28 present confusion matrices that aggregate 6000 classification
outcomes (200 test images × 30 single-shot trials) at K = 1 for each df configuration.
The confusion matrices confirm and extend the observations from the output distribution analysis. For Fashion-
MNIST, Trouser achieves consistently high accuracy across all df values. The footwear categories (Sandal, Sneaker,
Ankle boot) show moderate mutual confusion. The most challenging distinctions involve upper-body garments: T-
shirt/top, Pullover, Shirt, and Coat require higher df to separate reliably. These patterns agree with the output
distributions in Fig. A26 and the t-SNE clustering in Fig. A24.
For MNIST, digits 1 and 4 achieve high accuracy even at low df, while digits sharing similar stroke structures
show elevated confusion. As df increases, the matrices become increasingly diagonal, with most off-diagonal entries
approaching zero.
E.
K-shot integration
The results presented so far use single-shot inference (K = 1), where each binary feature vector constitutes one
independent classification attempt. In practical deployments, single-photon detectors operate with a fixed integration
window and repeatedly collect counts—the natural operating mode that motivates K-shot measurements, where K
independent single-shot outcomes are summed before classification.
Importantly, K-shot scaling differs fundamentally from extending the integration time itself. Changing the integra-
tion duration would correspond to η scaling (continuous adjustment of the expected photon level per measurement),
whereas K-shot scaling keeps the integration window fixed and accumulates discrete, independent measurements.
This distinction matters because the models are trained at a specific photon level (η = 1), and K-shot integration
preserves this operating point while reducing measurement variance through averaging.
As discussed in Appendix 5 C, increasing K improves classification accuracy but is not optimal with respect to
total photon budget: for a fixed number of measurements, using more independently optimized features (df scaling)
generally outperforms repeated sampling of fewer features (K scaling).
To evaluate experimental performance at different K values, we group the 30 measurements per image: K = 2
yields 15 trials, K = 3 yields 10 trials, and K = 5 yields 6 trials, where each trial sums K consecutive binary outcomes
per pattern before classification. Table A6 and Table A7 present the results.
The experimental results exhibit the same trends observed in simulation: accuracy increases with both df and K,
with diminishing returns as either parameter grows large. Fig. A29 summarizes these results across all evaluated df
and K configurations.
F.
Comparison to simulation
Experimental accuracy can be compared directly to simulation predictions using the corresponding tables: Fashion-
MNIST experimental results (Table A6) versus simulation (Table A4), and MNIST experimental results (Table A7)
72
Predicted label
True label
c
d
Predicted label
True label
Predicted label
True label
a
Predicted label
True label
b
Predicted label
True label
e
Predicted label
True label
f
Fig. A27. Experimental confusion matrices for FashionMNIST at K = 1. a–f show results for
df = 4, 6, 10, 16, 24, 32, with the average detected photon count and overall accuracy indicated below each matrix.
Rows indicate true labels; columns indicate predicted labels.
73
d
Predicted label
True label
Predicted label
True label
c
Predicted label
True label
a
Predicted label
True label
b
Predicted label
True label
e
Predicted label
True label
f
Fig. A28. Experimental confusion matrices for MNIST at K = 1. a–f show results for
df = 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 64, with the average detected photon count and overall accuracy indicated below each matrix.
74
Table A6. Experimental test accuracy (%) on FashionMNIST for different df and K. Each entry shows mean ±
standard deviation across 200 test images.
K = 1
K = 2
K = 3
K = 5
df = 3
52.35 ± 1.43
54.53 ± 2.41
56.30 ± 1.35
56.17 ± 1.14
df = 4
62.58 ± 2.03
65.20 ± 1.84
66.95 ± 1.42
69.08 ± 1.10
df = 6
65.77 ± 2.35
69.87 ± 1.86
71.95 ± 1.77
72.50 ± 1.08
df = 10
73.20 ± 2.22
76.63 ± 1.32
77.80 ± 1.82
78.92 ± 1.30
df = 16
77.20 ± 2.20
80.47 ± 1.72
82.05 ± 1.75
83.00 ± 1.19
df = 24
79.37 ± 2.06
81.53 ± 1.02
83.15 ± 1.42
83.67 ± 1.03
df = 32
82.13 ± 1.27
83.77 ± 1.45
84.90 ± 0.94
85.67 ± 1.21
Table A7. Experimental test accuracy (%) on MNIST for different df and K. Each entry shows mean ± standard
deviation across 200 test images.
K = 1
K = 2
K = 3
K = 5
df = 4
58.33 ± 2.29
61.83 ± 2.53
64.85 ± 1.64
68.67 ± 1.14
df = 9
76.48 ± 2.30
82.57 ± 2.12
85.40 ± 0.83
87.75 ± 0.95
df = 16
85.70 ± 2.06
90.87 ± 1.37
91.85 ± 1.57
93.08 ± 0.98
df = 25
91.87 ± 1.70
95.50 ± 1.10
96.60 ± 0.86
96.58 ± 1.54
df = 36
95.12 ± 1.41
97.73 ± 0.96
98.05 ± 0.69
98.67 ± 0.37
df = 64
97.23 ± 1.00
99.00 ± 0.66
99.20 ± 0.68
99.75 ± 0.25
versus simulation (Table A5). The tables use identical formats and configurations with the same trained optical front
end and digital back end; the difference is that simulation was performed on a digital computer while experimental
data was collected from the physical setup.
Across all configurations, experimental accuracy closely tracks simulation predictions with a consistent gap of
approximately 1–2 percentage points.
Fig. 3B–C of the main text visualizes this comparison at K = 1, with a
restricted y-axis range to highlight the relationship (unlike Fig. 2E in the main text, which spans the full range from
zero to include the direct imaging baseline).
This modest performance gap is expected given practical considerations in the experimental implementation. As
shown in the robustness analysis, PANS models tolerate dark counts and ambient noise (Fig. A10) as well as photon
level fluctuations (Fig. A9), though small accuracy degradation does occur under these conditions. Additional factors
include residual spatial nonuniformities in the OLED display and imaging system, and temporal drift in alignment
and calibration over the course of sequential measurements. These contributions remain minor, partly due to careful
calibration and more importantly because the PANS framework is inherently robust to such variations.
The qualitative scaling behavior is identical between experiment and simulation: accuracy increases monotonically
with df, exhibits the same pattern of diminishing returns, and the relative ordering of all configurations matches
exactly. The K = 1 experimental data in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 of the main text and the full K-scaling results in Fig. A29
both correspond to the measurements reported in Table A6 and Table A7.
75
df
4.9 photons, 73.2%
df
29 photons, 97.2%
18 photons, 95.1%
8.6 photons, 85.7%
13 photons, 91.9%
8.6 photons, 77.2%
17 photons, 82.1%
2.1 photons, 62.6%
K = 5
K = 3
K = 2
K = 1
K = 5
K = 3
K = 2
K = 1
a
b
Fashion MNIST
MNIST
Fig. A29. Experimental classification accuracy versus number of illumination patterns df for
different shot counts K. a, FashionMNIST and b, MNIST. Markers with error bars show experimental results
(mean ± standard deviation); curves connect points for visual clarity. The four curves correspond to K = 1, 2, 3, 5
accumulated single-shot measurements per pattern before classification. Red annotations indicate the average total
detected photon budget Ndet per inference at selected df values for K = 1.
G.
Summary
The experimental results validate active PANS under realistic hardware conditions. Despite the pronounced stochas-
ticity of single-shot measurements at the detection bottleneck—where repeated trials of the same input yield visibly
different detection patterns—the optimized illumination patterns successfully encode task-relevant information that
the digital classifier reliably extracts. Classification accuracy closely tracks simulation predictions, confusion patterns
concentrate on genuinely ambiguous categories, and the framework scales consistently with both feature dimension df
and shot count K.
These results demonstrate that PANS can be successfully deployed in a physical optical system, achieving high-
accuracy classification with only a handful of detected photons per inference. The close agreement between simulation
and experiment, despite practical imperfections inherent to real hardware, suggests that PANS provides a robust
approach for photon-starved sensing applications in realistic conditions.
[1] C. Tang and R. R. Salakhutdinov, Learning stochastic feedforward neural networks.
Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 26 (2013).
[2] J. W. Peters and M. Welling, Probabilistic binary neural networks. arXiv:1809.03368 (2018).
[3] C. W. Helstrom, Quantum detection and estimation theory. Journal of Statistical Physics 1, 231–252 (1969).
[4] P. A. Morris, R. S. Aspden, J. E. Bell, R. W. Boyd, and M. J. Padgett, Imaging with a small number of photons. Nature
Communications 6, 5913 (2015).
[5] Q. Zhuang, Z. Zhang, and J. H. Shapiro, Distributed quantum sensing using continuous-variable multipartite entanglement.
Physical Review A 97, 032329 (2018).
76
[6] H. Defienne, W. P. Bowen, M. Chekhova, G. B. Lemos, D. Oron, S. Ramelow, N. Treps, and D. Faccio, Advances in
quantum imaging. Nature Photonics 18, 1024–1036 (2024).
[7] Y. Bengio, N. L´eonard, and A. Courville, Estimating or propagating gradients through stochastic neurons for conditional
computation. arXiv:1308.3432 (2013).
[8] I. Hubara, M. Courbariaux, D. Soudry, R. El-Yaniv, and Y. Bengio, Binarized neural networks.
Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 29 (2016).
[9] S.-Y. Ma, T. Wang, J. Laydevant, L. G. Wright, and P. L. McMahon, Quantum-limited stochastic optical neural networks
operating at a few quanta per activation. Nature Communications 16, 359 (2025).
[10] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level performance on imagenet
classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 1026–1034 (2015).
[11] J. Chung, S. Ahn, and Y. Bengio, Hierarchical multiscale recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.01704
(2016).
[12] T. Wang, S.-Y. Ma, L. G. Wright, T. Onodera, B. C. Richard, and P. L. McMahon, An optical neural network using less
than 1 photon per multiplication. Nature Communications 13, 1–8 (2022).
[13] L. G. Wright, T. Onodera, M. M. Stein, T. Wang, D. T. Schachter, Z. Hu, and P. L. McMahon, Deep physical neural
networks trained with backpropagation. Nature 601, 549–555 (2022).
[14] M. F. Duarte, M. A. Davenport, D. Takhar, J. N. Laska, T. Sun, K. F. Kelly, and R. G. Baraniuk, Single-pixel imaging
via compressive sampling. IEEE signal processing magazine 25, 83–91 (2008).
[15] H. Gao, B. Cheng, J. Wang, K. Li, J. Zhao, and D. Li, Object classification using CNN-based fusion of vision and LIDAR
in autonomous vehicle environment. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 14, 4224–4231 (2018).
[16] A. Jin, B. Yazıcı, and V. Ntziachristos, Light illumination and detection patterns for fluorescence diffuse optical tomography
based on compressive sensing. IEEE transactions on image processing 23, 2609–2624 (2014).
[17] L. Tian, Z. Liu, L.-H. Yeh, M. Chen, J. Zhong, and L. Waller, Computational illumination for high-speed in vitro Fourier
ptychographic microscopy. Optica 2, 904–911 (2015).
[18] T. Wang, M. M. Sohoni, L. G. Wright, M. M. Stein, S.-Y. Ma, T. Onodera, M. G. Anderson, and P. L. McMahon, Image
sensing with multilayer nonlinear optical neural networks. Nature Photonics 17, 408–415 (2023).
[19] G. Wetzstein, A. Ozcan, S. Gigan, S. Fan, D. Englund, M. Soljaˇci´c, C. Denz, D. A. Miller, and D. Psaltis, Inference in
artificial intelligence with deep optics and photonics. Nature 588, 39–47 (2020).
[20] X. Lin, Y. Rivenson, N. T. Yardimci, M. Veli, Y. Luo, M. Jarrahi, and A. Ozcan, All-optical machine learning using
diffractive deep neural networks. Science 361, 1004–1008 (2018).
[21] S. Gigan, Imaging and computing with disorder. Nature Physics 18, 980–985 (2022).
[22] J. Spall, X. Guo, T. D. Barrett, and A. Lvovsky, Fully reconfigurable coherent optical vector–matrix multiplication. Optics
Letters 45, 5752–5755 (2020).
[23] L. Bernstein, A. Sludds, C. Panuski, S. Trajtenberg-Mills, R. Hamerly, and D. Englund, Single-shot optical neural network.
Science Advances 9, eadg7904 (2023).
[24] H. Wang, J. Hu, A. Morandi, A. Nardi, F. Xia, X. Li, R. Savo, Q. Liu, R. Grange, and S. Gigan, Large-scale photonic
computing with nonlinear disordered media. Nature Computational Science 4, 429–439 (2024).
[25] M. Reck, A. Zeilinger, H. J. Bernstein, and P. Bertani, Experimental realization of any discrete unitary operator. Physical
Review Letters 73, 58 (1994).
[26] Y. Shen, N. C. Harris, S. Skirlo, M. Prabhu, T. Baehr-Jones, M. Hochberg, X. Sun, S. Zhao, H. Larochelle, D. Englund
et al. Deep learning with coherent nanophotonic circuits. Nature Photonics 11, 441 (2017).
[27] S. Bandyopadhyay, A. Sludds, S. Krastanov, R. Hamerly, N. Harris, D. Bunandar, M. Streshinsky, M. Hochberg, and
D. Englund, Single-chip photonic deep neural network with forward-only training. Nature Photonics 18, 1335–1343 (2024).
77
[28] M. S. S. Rahman, X. Yang, J. Li, B. Bai, and A. Ozcan, Universal linear intensity transformations using spatially incoherent
diffractive processors. Light: Science & Applications 12, 195 (2023).
[29] L. Van der Maaten and G. Hinton, Visualizing data using t-SNE. Journal of Machine Learning Research 9 (2008).
[30] E. J. Cand`es, J. Romberg, and T. Tao, Robust uncertainty principles: Exact signal reconstruction from highly incomplete
frequency information. IEEE Transactions on information theory 52, 489–509 (2006).
[31] D. L. Donoho, Compressed sensing. IEEE Transactions on information theory 52, 1289–1306 (2006).
[32] V. Sitzmann, S. Diamond, Y. Peng, X. Dun, S. Boyd, W. Heidrich, F. Heide, and G. Wetzstein, End-to-end optimization
of optics and image processing for achromatic extended depth of field and super-resolution imaging. ACM Transactions
on Graphics (TOG) 37, 1–13 (2018).
[33] C. A. Metzler, H. Ikoma, Y. Peng, and G. Wetzstein, Deep optics for single-shot high-dynamic-range imaging. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 1375–1385 (2020).
[34] D. Deb, Z. Jiao, R. Sims, A. Chen, M. Broxton, M. B. Ahrens, K. Podgorski, and S. C. Turaga, FourierNets enable the
design of highly non-local optical encoders for computational imaging. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
35, 25224–25236 (2022).
[35] R. Hamerly, L. Bernstein, A. Sludds, M. Soljaˇci´c, and D. Englund, Large-scale optical neural networks based on photo-
electric multiplication. Physical Review X 9, 021032 (2019).
[36] A. Sludds, S. Bandyopadhyay, Z. Chen, Z. Zhong, J. Cochrane, L. Bernstein, D. Bunandar, P. B. Dixon, S. A. Hamilton,
M. Streshinsky et al. Delocalized photonic deep learning on the internet’s edge. Science 378, 270–276 (2022).
[37] Y. Zhu, J. Shi, X. Wu, X. Liu, G. Zeng, J. Sun, L. Tian, and F. Su, Photon-limited non-imaging object detection and
classification based on single-pixel imaging system. Applied Physics B 126, 21 (2020).
[38] D. Schraivogel, T. M. Kuhn, B. Rauscher, M. Rodr´ıguez-Mart´ınez, M. Paulsen, K. Owsley, A. Middlebrook, C. Tischer,
B. Ramasz, D. Ordo˜nez-Rueda et al. High-speed fluorescence image–enabled cell sorting. Science 375, 315–320 (2022).
