The Luna Bound Propagator for Formal Analysis
of Neural Networks
Henry LeCates and Haoze Wu
Amherst College, USA
{hlecates26,hwu}@amherst.edu
Abstract. The parameterized CROWN analysis, a.k.a., α-CROWN,
has emerged as a practically successful bound propagation method for
neural network verification. However, existing implementations of α-
CROWN are limited to Python, which complicates integration into exist-
ing DNN verifiers and long-term production-level systems. We introduce
Luna, a new bound propagator implemented in C++. Luna supports
Interval Bound Propagation, the CROWN analysis, and the α-CROWN
analysis over a general computational graph. We describe the architec-
ture of Luna and show that it is competitive with the state-of-the-art
α-CROWN implementation in terms of both bound tightness and com-
putational efficiency on benchmarks from VNN-COMP 2025.
Keywords: Neural Network Verification · Bound Propagation · Ab-
stract Interpretation
1
Introduction
Bound propagation is an important technique in the formal analysis of deep
neural networks (DNNs). Modern DNN reasoners, such as α-β-CROWN [20,22,
24], ERAN [14–16], Marabou [8, 21], NeuralSAT [4], NNV [10, 18], nnenum [2],
VeriNet [6, 7], etc, all employ some version of bound propagation, either using
it as stand-alone, incomplete DNN verification procedures, or as in-processing
passes in a branch-and-bound/case-analysis-based search shell.
Over the past few years, numerous bound propagation methods (e.g., [12,
15, 19, 23, 25], inter alia) have been proposed. They differ in the choice of the
abstraction domain and abstraction refinement strategies, and span over the
spectrum of the efficiency and precision trade-off, from exact bounding based on
MILP [17], to fast bounding based on interval arithmetic [5].
In this paper, we focus on the parameterized CROWN (a.k.a. α-CROWN)
analysis [25], which empirically strikes a good balance between precision and
efficiency, and underlies the top two performers (α-β-CROWN and NeuralSAT)
in the past two VNN-COMPs [3, 9]. To date, practical implementations of α-
CROWN are only available in Python. The most widely used implementation is
auto_LiRPA [22], which serves as the bound-propagation backend for both α-
β-CROWN and NeuralSAT. While auto_LiRPA is in itself a high-performance
arXiv:2603.23878v1  [cs.LG]  25 Mar 2026
2
Henry LeCates and Haoze Wu
tool, invoking the Python-based α-CROWN from systems written in other pro-
gramming languages, e.g., C++ or MATLAB, can incurs nontrivial integration
and start-up overhead.
To reduce this barrier and make α-CROWN accessible as a more easily
integrable component for a wide range of verification tools (including future
production-level verifiers), we develop Luna, the first C++ implementation of
α-CROWN with a stable interface suitable for foreign-function integration. Luna
is designed for the common setting in which a verifier must obtain sound output
bounds for a given input region, while incurring minimal per-invocation over-
head and still leveraging parallelization when available. Luna currently includes
the following features:
– support for interval bound propagation (IBP), CROWN, and α-CROWN
analyses;
– parallelization for the core tensor and bound computations leveraging the
Torch Deep Learning Library;
– multiple integration modes, including a command-line interface, a native
C++ API, and Python bindings.
On benchmarks from VNN-COMP 2025, Luna produces output bounds that
are comparable with auto_LiRPA, the state-of-the-art α-CROWN implemen-
tation, with overall lower runtime and start-up overhead. We expect that Luna
will help to lower the engineering effort required to integrate strong bound-
propagation techniques into existing tools and to promote research work that
focus on other algorithmic bottlenecks in neural network verification.
2
Preliminaries on Bound Propagation
Let f : Rn →Rm be a feedforward neural network. Given vectors ℓ, u ∈Rn,
define the input box X := {x ∈Rn | ℓ≤x ≤u}. The goal of bound propagation
is to compute an output box Y := {y ∈Rm | a ≤y ≤b}, such that f(x) ∈Y for
all x ∈X.
CROWN The CROWN analysis [25] (or equivalent the DeepPoly analysis [15])
operates by constructing affine relaxations of each nonlinear layer. For a nonlin-
ear layer z′ = σ(z) where z ∈[ℓ, u], it builds affine functions hL(z) and hU(z)
such that hL(z) ≤σ(z) ≤hU(z) for all z ∈[ℓ, u]. By composing these affine
bounds layer by layer, one obtains global affine lower and upper bounds on the
network output. The concrete output bounds are then obtained by concretizing
the global affine bounds using the input box X.
Parameterized CROWN (α-CROWN) Many nonlinearities admit multiple
valid affine relaxations. For example, ReLU(z) = max(z, 0) ≥α · z for all α ∈
[0, 1]. Instead of fixing the relaxation, α-CROWN [22] considers a family of linear
relaxations parameterized by a variable α. This induces parameterized global
The Luna Bound Propagator for Formal Analysis of Neural Networks
3
ONNX Parser
VNN-Lib Parser
Bounds
UNSAT, 
UNKNOWN
Bounded Model
Computational 
Graph
Input Bounds
C Matrix
LiRPA Analysis
Bounded Node
Parameterized Bound 
Propagation
Optimize ɑ 
over C
Inference
IBP
Backward Relaxation 
Computation
𝛼-Parameter Management
Fig. 1: High-level overview of Luna’s system architecture.
bounds L(x, α) ≤f(x) ≤U(x, α) where L(x, α) and U(x, α) are affine in x for
fixed α. The choice of α is then optimized (once for lower bound and once for
upper bound) by solving
max
α∈A min
x∈X L(x, α),
min
α∈A max
x∈X U(x, α),
where A represents the valid ranges of α (e.g., [0, 1] for ReLU lower bound). In
practice, this nonconvex optimization problem is solved using projected gradient
descent [11] over α.
3
The Luna Bound Propagator
This section describes the architecture design of Luna. A high-level overview
is presented in Figure 1. Luna takes as input a neural network in the ONNX
format [1] and a specification in the VNN-LIB format, and computes sound
bounds with respect to the input region defined in the specification.
3.1
Bounded Model
Luna parses the inputs and convert them into (i) a bound-aware computational
graph on top of the Torch Deep Learning Library [13], (ii) an input domain with
element wise lower and upper bounds, and (iii) a set of linear output constraints
in the form Cy ≤t. These three components constitute the Bounded Model,
which is an internal representation of the verification problem shared by all
analysis routines. App. A.1 provides implementation details on parsing.
4
Henry LeCates and Haoze Wu
The computational graph is a directed acyclic graph whose nodes correspond
to layer operations. For each node, three types of bounds are recorded: concrete
bounds from interval arithmetic (IBP), linear relaxations from CROWN, and
optimized bounds from α-CROWN. The specification matrix C represents a
collection of linear constraints on the neural network output, which can be viewed
as an additional layer following the output layer. During bound propagation,
Luna treats this additional layer as the actual output layer and seeks to bound
its output. For example, for an output constraint y1 ≤y2, Luna seeks to bound
the value of an auxiliary variable a = y1 −y2.
Bounded Node Modules Each node in the computational graph is associated
with a Bounded Node module, which implements operator-specific bound com-
putation. Two types of propagation are implemented: 1) Interval Bound Proro-
gation (IBP), which is executed before the CROWN and α-CROWN analysis to
obtain initial bounds on the neurons and detect stable neurons; 2) the CROWN
backward propagation, which takes as input affine bounds of the output node
in terms of the subsequent node, propagates them backward through the node,
and outputs affine bounds of the output node in terms of the current node.
Non-linear optimizable activation nodes inherit from an intermediate base
class, which registers each node with the alpha optimization manager and pro-
vides the interface for storing and retrieving per-neuron α parameters. During
backward propagation, α is applied only for unstable neurons, while stable neu-
rons use fixed slopes.
Each node contains metadata on its dependencies, to ensure the tightest
bounds are used for relaxations. Specifically, each node maintains a list of which
inputs require precomputed bounds, and whether IBP is sufficient for computing
its intermediate bounds or whether a CROWN backward pass is needed.
Appendix A.2 provides more implementation details on the internal graph
representation and node functionality.
3.2
Bound Propagation Engine
The analysis engine forms the core of the verifier. It implements two complemen-
tary bound propagation techniques: CROWN, which performs linear relaxations
via backward propagation of symbolic coefficients, and α-CROWN with learn-
able relaxation parameter optimized by projected gradient descent.
CROWN The CROWN analysis module implements linear bound propaga-
tion. CROWN processes nodes in a backward topological order, beginning from
the output node. While propagating linear bounds backward, before a backward
pass through a non-linear node, the engine recursively traverses the dependency
graph, computing intermediate bounds for the pre-activation nodes, via sepa-
rate CROWN backward pass. This lazy intermediate bound computation strat-
egy, avoids unnecessary computation on stable neurons, while ensuring that the
unstable neurons receive the tightest available input bounds, directly effecting
The Luna Bound Propagator for Formal Analysis of Neural Networks
5
the quality of the backward relaxation. At the end of the backward propagation
process, the symbolic bounds are concretized into concrete numerical bounds.
The CROWN analysis engine also support CROWN-IBP which follows a two-
phase approach. First IBP is performed, establishing the intermediate bounds.
Second, a backward propagation from the output nodes occurs, using the pre-
computed IBP bounds as intermediate bounds in the relaxation process. This
avoids the cost of running separate CROWN backward passes to tighten each
intermediate node’s bounds, requiring only a single IBP forward pass followed by
one CROWN backward pass from the output node. This trades bound tightness
for computational efficiency. By default Luna’s default is standard CROWN,
which triggers additional CROWN backward passes for intermediate nodes.
α-CROWN The α-CROWN module extends CROWN by introducing learn-
able slope parameters that can tighten relaxations for selected nonlinearities. It
wraps the standard CROWN analysis: the underlying CROWN engine performs
all bound computation, while α-CROWN manages α parameter storage and the
optimization loop, maintaining separate parameters for lower- and upper-bound
optimization. At each optimization step, we collect all gradient-enabled α ten-
sors and pass them to the optimizer. Each iteration re-runs the full CROWN
backward pass, producing output bounds that depend on the current α values.
We optimize a simple objective, minimizing the negative sum of lower bounds (or
the positive sum of upper bounds), so improving the objective directly tightens
the corresponding bounds.
Appendix A.3 provides additional implementation details of the bound prop-
agation engine.
3.3
Front End.
Luna currently provides both a Command-Line Interface (CLI) and a Python
API. The CLI expects an ONNX network and a VNN-LIB specification as inputs.
The Python API allows users to load a network, specify input bounds, and
compute output bounds using a selected analysis method. Figure 2 shows an
example usage of the Python API. The interfaces allow users to set a time limit
and configure the bound propagation passes, such as the analysis method to use
(CROWN or α-CROWN), which bounds to optimize (upper, lower, or both),
and the number of iterations in the α-CROWN analysis. Device placement is
selected automatically (preferring CUDA if available), but can be overridden
with –cpu or –cuda. Full configuration options and details about CLI usage
appear in Appendix A.4.
3.4
Code, Installation, and Availability.
Luna is implemented in 20k lines of C++17 code with Python bindings via py-
bind11. The build system uses CMake and automatically downloads dependen-
cies (libtorch, Boost, Protobuf, ONNX, pybind11) when not found locally. The
6
Henry LeCates and Haoze Wu
from lirpapy import TorchModel
import numpy as np
onnx_path = "path/to/model.onnx"
model = TorchModel(onnx_path)
input_size = model.getInputSize()
lower_bounds = np.full(input_size, -1.0)
upper_bounds = np.full(input_size,
1.0)
model.setInputBounds(lower_bounds, upper_bounds)
result = model.compute_bounds(method="alphaCROWN")
Fig. 2: Example Python API usage: loading an ONNX model, setting input
bounds, and computing α-CROWN bounds.
project includes a comprehensive test suite of over 45 test files organized into unit
tests (covering individual node types, parsers, and analysis routines), integration
tests (end-to-end verification pipelines), and property-based tests (e.g., validat-
ing that CROWN bounds are strictly tighter than IBP). The Luna source code
is available on Github1 under the permissive modified BSD open-source license.
4
Evaluation
4.1
Experimental Setup
We compare against auto_LiRPA [22], which underlies the top two performers,
α-β-CROWN and NeuralSAT, in the past two VNN-COMPs [3, 9]. We evalu-
ate Luna on supported benchmarks from VNN-COMP 2025. Currently, Luna
supports a large fraction of the main track benchmarks. Handling richer speci-
fications (e.g., ones with disjunctive pre-conditions) and additional operators is
an on-going effort. Key hyper-parameters for the α-CROWN analysis include
the number of optimization iterations and the learning rate. We fix those two
parameters for both Luna and auto_LiRPA to 20 and 0.5 respectively. Aside
from these shared hyperparameters, we used each tool’s default configuration
for optimizing upper and lower bounds. We report three metrics: average bound
width on instances where both tools terminated, average runtime in seconds,
and the number of instances for which the tool successfully computed the out-
put bounds within the timeout. All experiments were run on a cluster equipped
with Dell PowerEdge R6525 CPU Servers. Each job is given 40 CPU cores, a
192 GB memory limit, and a 300 s wall-clock time limit.
4.2
Results and Analysis
Table 1 shows the results of Luna and auto_LiRPA on the evaluated bench-
marks. Luna finished more benchmark instances within the timeout and is faster
1 https://github.com/ai-ar-research/luna
The Luna Bound Propagator for Formal Analysis of Neural Networks
7
Bench. (# inst.)
Luna
auto_LiRPA
Width
Time (s) Finished
Width
Time (s) Finished
acasxu_2023 (184)
867.42
1.41
184
882.90
6.19
184
cersyve (12)
4.27
1.23
12
4.38
6.77
12
cifar100_2024 (200)
4.63
44.88
170
4.62
136.59
100
collins_rul_cnn_2022 (62)
35.80
3.57
62
35.98
5.78
62
cora_2024 (60)
12073.43
8.37
60
12067.97
9.53
60
linearizenn_2024 (60)
43.44
2.96
60
48.53
6.59
60
malbeware (150)
5.42
4.26
150
5.42
5.30
150
metaroom_2023 (100)
0.16
1.68
100
0.16
5.30
95
safenlp_2024 (189)
22.77
0.48
189
22.77
5.20
189
sat_relu (98)
58.99
0.51
98
58.99
5.13
98
tllverifybench_2023 (32)
207.98
18.63
32
213.18
45.03
20
Table 1: Comparison of Luna and auto_LiRPA
on every benchmark set. In terms of bound tightness, Luna produces tighter or
equivalent bounds on 9 of the 11 benchmarks. For example, on the acasxu_2023
benchmarks, Luna obtains tighter bounds in less time. And on the tllverify-
bench_2023 benchmarks, Luna produces tighter bounds while being over 2.4
times faster and finishing on all 32 instances compared to auto_LiRPA’s 20.
Observing the 7 of the 11 benchmarks where Luna computed different av-
erage bound widths, Luna’s bounds are tighter on 5 of them. Further on all 7
of the benchmarks, Luna has a much faster runtime. On the 4 benchmarks the
two tools produce compute equivalent bounds, Luna is more efficient. Notably,
on the cifar100_2024 benchmarks, Luna is over 3 times faster (136.59/44.88),
and finishes on 70 more instances than auto_LiRPA. The competitive per-
formance stems from careful management of the computational graph, concrete
design choices regarding the frequency of bound concretization, and operator-
specific propagation strategies.
Overall, at its current stage, Luna is competitive with the Python-based
state-of-the-art bound propagator auto_LiRPA. Full per-instance results for
all the reported benchmarks is publicly available.2
5
Conclusion and Next Steps
We presented Luna, a C++-based bound propagation framework that imple-
ments CROWN and α-CROWN. Our evaluation showed that Luna is compet-
itive with state-of-the-art bound propagator auto_LiRPA in terms of bound
tightness and overall more efficient on benchmarks from VNN-COMP’25. Future
work includes expanding supported operator coverage, and integrating Luna
into a complete verification workflow.
2 https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1iEfJ50rmWIgIK_
Z2eQyPP1W5MFFSr382?usp=share_link
8
Henry LeCates and Haoze Wu
References
1. Bai, J., Lu, F., Zhang, K., et al.: Onnx: Open neural network exchange. https:
//github.com/onnx/onnx (2019)
2. Bak, S., Tran, H.D., Hobbs, K., Johnson, T.T.: Improved Geometric Path Enu-
meration for Verifying ReLU Neural Networks. In: International Conference on
Computer Aided Verification. pp. 66–96. Springer (2020)
3. Brix, C., Bak, S., Johnson, T.T., Wu, H.: The fifth international verification of neu-
ral networks competition (vnn-comp 2024): Summary and results. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.19985 (2024)
4. Duong, H., Nguyen, T., Dwyer, M.B.: Neuralsat: a high-performance verification
tool for deep neural networks. In: International Conference on Computer Aided
Verification. pp. 409–423. Springer (2025)
5. Gowal, S., Dvijotham, K., Stanforth, R., Bunel, R., Qin, C., Uesato, J., Arand-
jelovic, R., Mann, T., Kohli, P.: On the Effectiveness of Interval Bound Propagation
for Training Verifiably Robust Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12715 (2018)
6. Henriksen, P., Lomuscio, A.: DEEPSPLIT: An Efficient Splitting Method for Neu-
ral Network Verification via Indirect Effect Analysis. In: International Joint Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence. pp. 2549–2555. ijcai.org (8 2021)
7. Henriksen, P., Lomuscio, A.R.: Efficient Neural Network Verification via Adap-
tive Refinement and Adversarial Search. In: Giacomo, G.D., Catalá, A., Dilkina,
B., Milano, M., Barro, S., Bugarín, A., Lang, J. (eds.) European Conference on
Artificial Intelligence. vol. 325, pp. 2513–2520. IOS Press (2020)
8. Katz, G., Huang, D., Ibeling, D., Julian, K., Lazarus, C., Lim, R., Shah, P.,
Thakoor, S., Wu, H., Zeljić, A., Dill, D., Kochenderfer, M., Barrett, C.: The
Marabou Framework for Verification and Analysis of Deep Neural Networks. In:
Proc. 31st Int. Conf. on Computer Aided Verification (CAV). pp. 443–452 (2019)
9. Kaulen, K., Ladner, T., Bak, S., Brix, C., Duong, H., Flinkow, T., Johnson, T.T.,
Koller, L., Manino, E., Nguyen, T.H., et al.: The 6th international verification
of neural networks competition (vnn-comp 2025): Summary and results. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2512.19007 (2025)
10. Lopez, D.M., Choi, S.W., Tran, H., Johnson, T.T.: NNV 2.0: The Neural Network
Verification Tool. In: Enea, C., Lal, A. (eds.) International Conference on Computer
Aided Verification. vol. 13965, pp. 397–412. Springer (2023)
11. Madry, A., Makelov, A., Schmidt, L., Tsipras, D., Vladu, A.: Towards deep learning
models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083 (2017)
12. Müller, M.N., Makarchuk, G., Singh, G., Püschel, M., Vechev, M.: Prima: general
and precise neural network certification via scalable convex hull approximations.
Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 6(POPL), 1–33 (2022)
13. Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., Killeen,
T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga, L., et al.: Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing sys-
tems 32 (2019)
14. Singh, G., Ganvir, R., Püschel, M., Vechev, M.: Beyond the Single Neuron Convex
Barrier for Neural Network Certification. Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 32, 15098–15109 (2019)
15. Singh, G., Gehr, T., Püschel, M., Vechev, M.: An Abstract Domain for Certifying
Neural Networks. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 3(POPL),
1–30 (2019)
The Luna Bound Propagator for Formal Analysis of Neural Networks
9
16. Singh, G., Gehr, T., Püschel, M., Vechev, M.: Boosting Robustness Certification of
Neural Networks. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (2019)
17. Tjeng, V., Xiao, K.Y., Tedrake, R.: Evaluating robustness of neural networks with
mixed integer programming. In: International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations (2019)
18. Tran, H.D., Yang, X., Manzanas Lopez, D., Musau, P., Nguyen, L.V., Xiang, W.,
Bak, S., Johnson, T.T.: NNV: the Neural Network Verification Tool for Deep Neural
Networks and Learning-enabled Cyber-Physical Systems. In: International Confer-
ence on Computer Aided Verification. pp. 3–17. Springer (2020)
19. Wang, S., Pei, K., Whitehouse, J., Yang, J., Jana, S.: Efficient Formal Safety
Analysis of Neural Networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
31, 6369–6379 (2018)
20. Wang, S., Zhang, H., Xu, K., Lin, X., Jana, S., Hsieh, C.J., Kolter, J.Z.: Beta-
crown: Efficient Bound Propagation with Per-neuron Split Constraints for Neural
Network Robustness Verification. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 34, 29909–29921 (2021)
21. Wu, H., Isac, O., Zeljić, A., Tagomori, T., Daggitt, M., Kokke, W., Refaeli, I.,
Amir, G., Julian, K., Bassan, S., et al.: Marabou 2.0: A Versatile Formal Analyzer
of Neural Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14461 (2024)
22. Xu, K., Shi, Z., Zhang, H., Wang, Y., Chang, K.W., Huang, M., Kailkhura, B., Lin,
X., Hsieh, C.J.: Automatic Perturbation Analysis for Scalable Certified Robustness
and Beyond. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, 1129–1141
(2020)
23. Zelazny, T., Wu, H., Barrett, C., Katz, G.: On Reducing Over-Approximation Er-
rors for Neural Network Verification. In: Proc. 22nd Int. Conf. on Formal Methods
in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD). pp. 17–26 (2022)
24. Zhang, H., Wang, S., Xu, K., Li, L., Li, B., Jana, S., Hsieh, C.J., Kolter, J.Z.:
General Cutting Planes for Bound-propagation-based Neural Network Verification.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, 1656–1670 (2022)
25. Zhang, H., Weng, T.W., Chen, P.Y., Hsieh, C.J., Daniel, L.: Efficient Neural Net-
work Robustness Certification with General Activation Functions. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 31, 4944–4953 (2018)
10
Henry LeCates and Haoze Wu
A
Architecture and Core Components
This appendix records implementation-level details that complement Section 3,
focusing on concrete classes, entry points, and internal data structures.
A.1
Input Parsing
Onnx Parser The OnnxToTorchParser converts ONNX models through its
main entry point, OnnxToTorchParser::parse(path), which returns a fully
constructed TorchModel. Internally, processGraph() builds a topologically or-
dered list of nodes: (i) graph inputs become source nodes with no dependencies,
(ii) ONNX initializers (e.g., weights, biases, and other constants) become nodes
that represent fixed tensors, and (iii) each remaining ONNX operator becomes
a corresponding bound-aware operator node.
Dependencies are resolved by mapping each operator’s input tensor names
to previously created node indices, naturally supporting general DAG structure.
For simple elementwise operators (e.g., Add and Sub), we distinguish between
inputs that depend on earlier activations and inputs that are fixed constants;
only the former are recorded as bound dependencies, since constant tensors do
not require precomputed bounds during propagation.
Shape inference runs before node construction in a separate multi-pass pro-
cess. Its goal is to attach consistent tensor dimensions to each node so that
shape-sensitive operators (e.g., Reshape) can be validated and constructed reli-
ably. The parser validates operator input counts, rejects unsupported data types,
and emits operator-specific error messages for malformed graphs.
VNN-LIB Parsing The VnnLibInputParser provides three entry points:
parseInputBounds(path, expectedInputSize) for input bounds (as a
BoundedTensor), parseOutputConstraints(path, expectedOutputSize) for
output constraints (as an OutputConstraintSet), and
parseInputAndOutputConstraints(path, inputSize, outputSize) to parse
both in a single pass.
Parsing proceeds in two phases. readVnnLibFile() reads the file and removes
comments; tokenize() then converts the remaining content into a stream of to-
kens (parentheses, operators, identifiers, and numeric literals). For input bounds,
the parser reads declarations of the form declare-const X_i Real and extracts
interval constraints from assert statements, handling nested conjunctions (and)
via recursion. If an input variable is declared but not constrained, it is treated
as unbounded (i.e., [−∞, +∞]), which is conservative.
For output constraints, parseLinearExpression() recursively evaluates ex-
pressions over output variables Yi and produces a sparse set of coefficient terms.
Constraints are normalized to the form Cy ≤t; ≥constraints are rewritten by
negating both sides. Disjunctions (or) are represented as multiple branches col-
lected by parseOutputBranch(); verification succeeds if any branch is satisfied.
The Luna Bound Propagator for Formal Analysis of Neural Networks
11
A.2
Bounded Model Representation
Bounded Model After parsing, the network is stored as a computational graph
with explicit dependency information in both directions: a forward map (map-
pings nodes to their inputs) and a reverse map (mappings nodes to their suc-
cessors). These maps are constructed by buildDependencyGraph() and allow
efficient traversal for both forward interval propagation and backward linear
relaxations.
The main analysis entry point is compute_bounds(), which dispatches to
runCROWN() or runAlphaCROWN() based on the selected method and returns a
BoundedTensor containing the final lower and upper output bounds.
Bounded Nodes Nonlinear activations nodes whose relaxations can be opti-
mized (e.g., BoundedReLUNode) inherit from BoundedAlphaOptimizeNode. These
nodes create learnable slope parameters lazily: during boundBackward(). This
allocation is only needed for unstable neurons, meaning neurons whose input
bounds contain 0; for stable neurons the ReLU behavior is fixed and no relax-
ation parameter is required.
To keep memory usage low, nodes store only long-lived information such as
registered module parameters, shape metadata, and cached initialization values.
Per-run quantities (for example, the symbolic coefficient tensors used in back-
ward propagation) are recomputed on each backward pass, since they depend on
the current input bounds and (for α-CROWN) the current parametrized slope
values.
A.3
Bound Propagation Engine
The analysis engine implements two complementary bound-propagation meth-
ods. CROWN constructs linear upper and lower bounds by propagating symbolic
coefficients backward through the graph, while α-CROWN tightens those bounds
by optimizing learnable slope parameters for non linear activations.
CROWN The CROWN analysis module implements linear bound propagation
through a three-phase pipeline. First, fast Interval Bound Propagation (IBP) is
performed via computeIBPBounds(), establishing initial interval bounds for all
nodes in the network. The second phase, backwardFrom(startIndex), executes
backward propagation from a specified output node, computing linear relaxation
coefficients that express the output as a linear function of earlier layers. Finally,
concretizeNode(startIndex) transforms these symbolic bounds into concrete
numerical bounds using the concretization formula.
In the standard CROWN, after the initial IBP pass, only the input node is
marked as having concrete bounds. During the backward pass from the output,
when a nonlinear node (e.g., ReLU) requires bounds on its inputs to compute
relaxations, checkPriorBounds() triggers computeIntermediateBoundsLazy()
for those inputs. This method first attempts to use IBP if the dependency chain
12
Henry LeCates and Haoze Wu
consists only of element-wise operations (via checkIBPIntermediate()). If the
chain contains linear layers, a separate CROWN backward pass is launched for
that intermediate node to compute tighter bounds. This lazy computation strat-
egy tightens intermediate bounds beyond IBP where beneficial, producing tighter
final bounds at the cost of multiple backward passes.
For CROWN-IBP, after the initial IBP pass, all nodes are marked as having
concrete bounds. The single backward pass from the output uses these precom-
puted IBP bounds as intermediate bounds during relaxations. No additional
backward passes are triggered.
The helper preprocessC() transforms a specification matrix of the output
constraints into the internal representation. If no specification is provided, an
identity specification is constructed to bound each output dimension indepen-
dently.
α-CROWN α-CROWN stores relaxation parameters in a nested map indexed
by node and specification branch, with separate parameter sets used when opti-
mizing lower bounds versus upper bounds.computeOptimizedBounds() runs it-
erative gradient-based optimization, where each iteration re-runs CROWN with
gradient tracking enabled, extracts the resulting bounds, and defines a loss that
encourages tighter bounds (e.g., the negative sum of lower bounds when max-
imizing lower bounds, or the positive sum of upper bounds when minimizing
upper bounds).
When an iteration improves the objective, the current learned slope values
and the corresponding bounds are cached as the best-so-far solution. The op-
timizer follows the standard zero_grad(), backward(), step() sequence, then
clips the learned slopes to a valid range (for ReLU, [0,1]). Early stopping with a
configurable patience detects convergence and restores the best cached learned
slope values.
A.4
Front End
Python API The Python API lunapy exposes TorchModel and BoundedTensor
via pybind11 bindings. Users can load a network, specify input bounds, and
compute output bounds using a selected analysis method. In addition to di-
rect parsing from .onnx and .vnnlib files, lirpapy supports user-constructed
specifications and custom analysis workflows.
CLI The CLI executable accepts an ONNX model and a VNN-LIB specification,
making it suitable for automated runs and direct integration with the VNN-
COMP benchmark format. Below is an example of invoking Luna through its
CLI:
lirpa --input <path/to/model.onnx> --vnnlib <path/to/property.vnnlib> /
--method alpha-crown --optimize-lower --optimize-upper --lr 0.5 /
--iterations 20
The Luna Bound Propagator for Formal Analysis of Neural Networks
13
All front ends share a unified configuration layer, LirpaConfiguration, so
that the same analysis choices and runtime settings apply regardless of whether
Luna is invoked through Python or the CLI. Users select the analysis method
with –method (crown by default or alpha-crown) and control which bounds are
computed (lower/upper) as well as logging via –verbose/–quiet or –verbosity.
For α-CROWN, optimization is determined by standard hyperparameters in-
cluding –iterations, –lr, and –lr-decay, with additional toggles for opti-
mizing lower and/or upper bounds (–optimize-lower/–no-optimize-lower,
–optimize-upper/–no-optimize-upper) and stability-focused options such as
early stopping and retaining the best iteration. For CROWN-style analysis, the
configuration exposes a choice between standard CROWN and CROWN-IBP
(–standard-crown vs. –crown-ibp). Runtime and reproducibility are handled
through –timeout and –seed. Device placement is selected automatically when
CUDA is available, but can be overridden with –cpu or –cuda.
