The Value of Information in Resource-Constrained Pricing
Ruicheng AoвҖ 
Jiashuo JiangвҖЎ
David Simchi-LeviвҖ ,В§
вҖ  Institute for Data, Systems, and Society, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
В§ Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering and Operations Research Center, MIT
aorc@mit.edu, dslevi@mit.edu
вҖЎ Department of Industrial Engineering and Decision Analytics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
jsjiang@ust.hk
Abstract
Firms that price perishable resourcesвҖ”airline seats, hotel rooms, seasonal inventoryвҖ”now
routinely use demand predictions, but these predictions vary widely in quality. Under hard ca-
pacity constraints, acting on an inaccurate prediction can irreversibly deplete inventory needed
for future periods. We study how prediction uncertainty propagates into dynamic pricing de-
cisions with linear demand, stochastic noise, and finite capacity. A certified demand forecast
with known error bound Пө0 specifies where the system should operate: it shifts regret from
O(
вҲҡ
T) to O(log T) when Пө0 вүІT вҲ’1/4, and we prove this threshold is tight. A misspecified
surrogate modelвҖ”biased but correlated with true demandвҖ”cannot set prices directly but re-
duces learning variance by a factor of (1 вҲ’ПҒ2) through control variates. The two mechanisms
compose: the forecast determines the regret regime; the surrogate tightens estimation within
it. All algorithms rest on a boundary attraction mechanism that stabilizes pricing near degen-
erate capacity boundaries without requiring non-degeneracy assumptions. Experiments confirm
the phase transition threshold, the variance reduction from surrogates, and robustness across
problem instances.
Keywords: Dynamic pricing, prediction uncertainty, resource constraints, revenue management,
demand learning, value of information.
1
Introduction
Firms that price perishable resourcesвҖ”airline seats, hotel rooms, cloud compute, seasonal inventoryвҖ”
now routinely use demand predictions generated by machine learning models, historical forecasting
systems, or surrogate signals derived from related markets. An airline may have a revenue man-
agement system calibrated over years of booking data; a cloud provider may use a demand model
trained on workload traces from adjacent services; a retailer entering a new market may rely on
price-sensitivity estimates transferred from a similar product category.
These predictions vary
widely in quality. A well-calibrated forecast may predict demand to within a few percent, while
a surrogate trained on a different product category captures broad price-sensitivity patterns but
carries systematic bias. The operational question is how prediction uncertainty propagates into
pricing decisions when resources are limited and pricing errors are irreversible.
This question arises because demand predictions, however sophisticated, are rarely exact. Fore-
casting models suffer from distributional shift as market conditions evolve; surrogate models trained
on offline data may be misspecified relative to the current pricing environment; and even well-
calibrated systems degrade when deployed outside their training distribution. In unconstrained
1
arXiv:2603.24974v1  [math.OC]  26 Mar 2026
settings, the consequences of prediction error are mild: a suboptimal price reduces revenue for a
single period, and the firm can adjust in the next. Under hard capacity constraints, however, the
consequences are asymmetric and potentially severe. Underpricing depletes inventory needed for
the remainder of the selling horizon, and this depletion is irreversible. A pricing policy must there-
fore simultaneously learn demand, exploit available predictions, and guard against the possibility
that those predictions are wrong. This three-way tradeoffвҖ”learning, earning, and hedgingвҖ”has no
analog in the unconstrained demand learning literature (Keskin and Zeevi 2014, Bu et al. 2020),
where each periodвҖҷs pricing error is self-contained.
Two practical observations motivate our approach. First, not all predictions are created equal:
a forecast with a certified accuracy guarantee carries fundamentally different information from
a biased surrogate model, and a pricing system that treats them identically leaves value on the
table or, worse, destabilizes the system. Second, prediction quality interacts with the time horizon
in a non-obvious way: a forecast that is adequate for a short selling season may be dangerously
inaccurate over a longer one. These observations suggest that the right framework should explicitly
distinguish among prediction types and characterize how prediction quality requirements scale with
the planning horizon.
We develop a unified framework for constrained dynamic pricing under prediction uncertainty.
Given predictions of unknown and heterogeneous quality, how should a capacity-constrained firm
decide which predictions to trust, how to use them, and when to discard them? We distinguish two
forms of prediction that enter the problem differently:
вҖў A certified demand forecastвҖ”a price-demand pair (p0, d0) with a known error bound Пө0вҖ”
specifies where the system should operate. When accurate enough, it shifts the regret regime
from O(
вҲҡ
T) to O(log T).
вҖў A misspecified surrogate modelвҖ”biased but correlated with true demandвҖ”cannot set prices
directly but reduces estimation variance through control variates, accelerating learning within
any regime.
These two roles are complementary and composable: the forecast determines what to do; the
surrogate determines how precisely to learn.
Misusing eitherвҖ”trusting a biased surrogate as a
price recommendation, or using an accurate forecast merely to reduce varianceвҖ”forfeits revenue or
destabilizes the system.
We make three contributions.
1. Robust pricing under degeneracy (Section 3).
We introduce boundary attraction,
a re-solving mechanism that stabilizes pricing near degenerate capacity boundaries. When
resources approach depletion or multiple products compete for the same capacity, the fluid
optimization that guides pricing admits multiple optimal solutions, and standard re-solving
policies can oscillate between them. boundary attraction resolves this by rounding near-zero
demand components to zero, steering the system away from the ill-conditioned region. With
a calibrated demand model, the resulting policy achieves O(log T) regret without the non-
degeneracy assumptions required by prior analyses (Wang and Wang 2022, Li and Ye 2022).
This mechanism underlies all subsequent algorithms.
2. A prediction quality threshold for regime change (Sections 4вҖ“5).
Without any
forecast, our policy attains the minimax-optimal O(
вҲҡ
T) regret through periodic re-estimation
and structured price perturbations. With a certified forecast of accuracy Пө0, a sharp phase
transition emerges at Пө0 вүҲT вҲ’1/4: forecasts more accurate than this threshold recover near-
logarithmic regret, while less accurate forecasts are safely screened and the system reverts
2
Full Information
Known (Оұ, B)
Informed Price
Prior p0, error Пө0
No Information
Online learning
Surrogate Data
Offline auxiliary
Inputs
Step 1: Estimation
Solve fluid LP for target dвҲ—
Step 2: Boundary Attraction
вҖў Small demands: round to 0
вҖў Large demands: keep safe
Unified Algorithm
Scenario A
Full Info / Good Prior
O(log T)
Scenario B
No Info / Poor Prior
O(
вҲҡ
T)
Outcomes
Reduces variance
Пө0 вүҲT вҲ’1/4
Figure 1: Overview of the unified framework. boundary attraction underlies all settings. Without
offline information, the system learns online at the minimax O(
вҲҡ
T) rate. A certified informed
price (p0, d0) can improve the regime to near-logarithmic regret when Пө0 вүІT вҲ’1/4, while correlated
surrogate signals reduce learning variance and improve constants. The combined policy compounds
both benefits.
to online learning. For a selling horizon of T = 10,000 periods, this threshold corresponds
to roughly 10% prediction accuracyвҖ”a concrete target for forecast quality investment. A
matching lower bound (Proposition 7) shows this threshold is tight: no algorithm can beat
Оҳ(
вҲҡ
T) when Пө0 вү«T вҲ’1/4, regardless of how it uses the forecast.
3. Variance reduction from biased surrogates (Section 6). Misspecified surrogate models
improve pricing when used as variance-reducing instruments rather than direct recommen-
dations. The mechanism is control variates: by subtracting the predictable component of
demand noise using the correlated surrogate signal, the system obtains lower-variance pseudo-
observations for parameter estimation. Surrogate correlation reduces the learning cost by a
factor of (1 вҲ’ПҒ2), where ПҒ measures correlation with true demand. A surrogate with ПҒ = 0.7
reduces learning variance by half; one with ПҒ = 0.9 reduces it by 81%. Combined with a
certified forecast, the two mechanisms compose: the forecast shifts the regret regime, and the
surrogate tightens estimation within it (Theorem 9).
Across all settings, regret decomposes into three components: stochastic noise (inherent demand
variability), parameter uncertainty (the cost of learning demand online), and initialization bias (the
cost of prediction error). boundary attraction controls the first, surrogate correlation reduces the
second, and forecast accuracy governs the third. Figure 1 summarizes this decomposition.
1.1
Related Literature
Constrained pricing and degeneracy. Dynamic pricing of perishable resources dates to the
fluid benchmark of Gallego and Van Ryzin (1994); see Jasin (2014), Bumpensanti and Wang (2020),
Wang and Wang (2022), Jiang et al. (2025), Ao et al. (2024a,b, 2025b), Jiang and Zhang (2025)
3
and references therein. Existing logarithmic-regret re-solving results require structural regularityвҖ”
non-degeneracy or isolated optimal bases (Wang and Wang 2022, Li and Ye 2022).
We target
the opposite regime: fluid solutions may be degenerate exactly where capacity binds most tightly.
boundary attraction steers pricing away from these ill-conditioned boundaries and delivers loga-
rithmic regret without structural assumptions.
Demand prediction and prior information in pricing. In unconstrained dynamic pricing,
Keskin and Zeevi (2014) show that exact prior knowledge fundamentally improves learning rates.
Bu et al. (2020) characterize phase transitions and an inverse-square law for optimal regret as
a function of offline data quality, showing that even imperfect historical prices carry non-trivial
information. Subsequent work extends these ideas to offline data integration and misspecification
(Ferreira et al. 2018, Wang et al. 2024, Li et al. 2021, Simchi-Levi and Xu 2022, Xu and Zeevi
2020). A conference version of this paper (Ao et al. 2025a) introduced the full-information, no-
information, and informed-price settings under resource constraints, establishing that a certified
prior interpolates between O(log T) and O(
вҲҡ
T) regret. The present paper extends that work in two
directions: a matching lower bound that pins the phase transition at Пө0 вүҲT вҲ’1/4 (Proposition 7),
and surrogate-assisted variance reduction for biased but correlated prediction models (Section 6).
Theorem 9 shows these two mechanisms compose: the certified forecast determines the regret
regime; the surrogate tightens estimation within it.
Online learning under constraints. The bandits-with-knapsacks literature addresses on-
line decision-making under resource constraints, primarily for discrete actions and bandit feedback
(Badanidiyuru et al. 2014, Agrawal and Devanur 2016, Agrawal et al. 2016, Liu et al. 2022, Chen
et al. 2024, Ma et al. 2024, Sankararaman and Slivkins 2021, Sivakumar et al. 2022, Liu and Grigas
2022). A separate line on learning-augmented algorithms studies consistencyвҖ“robustness tradeoffs
when external advice may be imperfect (Lykouris and Vassilvitskii 2021, Mitzenmacher and Vas-
silvitskii 2022, Purohit et al. 2018, Wei and Zhang 2020, Bhaskara et al. 2020, 2021, 2023). Our
informed-price result follows the consistencyвҖ“robustness logic but operates in a different decision
structure: continuous pricing with fluid LPs and irreversible resource consumption.
Prediction-powered inference and AI-assisted operations. The surrogate framework
builds on control variates and prediction-powered inference (Ao et al. 2026c,a,b): the surrogate
signal reduces estimation variance rather than directly recommending prices.
This distinction
matters under hard constraints, where biased price recommendations can trigger premature resource
depletion but biased variance-reducing signals remain useful. More broadly, predictive systems and
AI tools now provide decision support across operational settingsвҖ”from demand forecasting to
optimization model formulation (Liang et al. 2026, Ao et al. 2026d,e, Duan et al. 2025, Baek
et al. 2026b,a). We characterize when such imperfect predictions should alter the operating point
(certified forecasts) and when they should only sharpen estimation (correlated surrogates).
Notation. For a real number x, we use вҢҲxвҢүto denote the smallest integer вүҘx and вҢҠxвҢӢfor the
largest integer вүӨx. We write x+ = max{x, 0}. For a set S, let |S| be its cardinality. We denote
by
dmax =
max
pвҲҲ[L,U]n вҲҘf(p)вҲҘ2
the maximum в„“2-norm of any feasible demand vector under the true demand function f.
2
Model and Preliminaries
We study dynamic pricing of n products sharing m resources over a horizon of T periods. At each
period t, the decision-maker (DM) sets a price vector pt вҲҲ[L, U]n, observes stochastic demand
4
dt вҲҲRn
+, and updates remaining capacities by
ct+1 = ct вҲ’A dt ,
where A вҲҲRmГ—n
+
is a known consumption matrix and c0 is the initial capacity vector. The goal is
to find a pricing policy maximizing total expected revenue
E
h
T
X
t=1
(pt)вҠӨdti
,
while respecting resource constraints (demand exceeding remaining capacity is not served).
We measure any policy ПҖ by its regret relative to an idealized fluid benchmark that replaces
random demand with its expectation and solves the resulting deterministic problem. Given a known
demand function f(p) = E[d | p], the fluid optimal value is
V Fluid(c0) =
max
pвҲҲ[L,U]n { T В· pвҠӨf(p) | A f(p) вүӨc0/T } .
(1)
Following the revenue management literature (Talluri and van Ryzin 2004, Bu et al. 2020),
we impose two structural assumptions: linear demand, which captures price sensitivity with a
finite-dimensional parameter space, and negative-definite slope matrices, which guarantee concave
revenue and rule out pathological cases where lowering prices increases demand indefinitely.
Assumption 1 (Linear demand model). We assume the true demand function is linear. That is,
there exist parameters Оұ = (Оұ1, . . . , Оұn)вҠӨвҲҲRn and B вҲҲRnГ—n such that
f(p) = Оұ + B p
for any price vector p in the feasible domain.
Linear demand models are standard in dynamic pricing (Keskin and Zeevi 2014, Javanmard and
Nazerzadeh 2019). Even in this setting, Bu et al. (2020) show that the interplay between offline
data and online learning produces rich phenomenaвҖ”phase transitions and an inverse-square lawвҖ”
so linear demand is far from trivial when prior information quality varies. Applications include
airlines pricing perishable seats, retailers selling seasonal goods, and cloud providers allocating
compute capacityвҖ”all settings where unsold inventory has no salvage value. We focus on linear
demand for clarity; the analysis extends to general parametric models under standard regularity
conditions (e.g., Lipschitz continuity and concavity).
Beyond linearity, we require the demand slope to be strictly negative-definite:
Assumption 2 (Negative definiteness). The matrix B is negative definite; namely, О»max(B+BвҠӨ) <
0 where О»max(В·) denotes the largest eigenvalue of a matrix. We also assume that Оұ is large enough
to guarantee f(p) вүҘ0 for any price vector p in the feasible domain.
This condition ensures strictly decreasing demand (Bjj < 0), invertibility of B, and concavity of
the revenue function p 7вҶ’pвҠӨf(p)вҖ”all essential for the boundary attraction mechanism in Section 3.
The observed demand at period t is
dt = f(pt) + Пөt ,
where Пөt вҲҲRn is a zero-mean noise vector with Пөt вүҘвҲ’f(pt), assumed sub-Gaussian with parameter
Пғ2: P(|vвҠӨПөt| вүҘО») вүӨ2 exp(вҲ’О»2/(2Пғ2)) for any unit vector v. Revenue at time t is rt = ptвҠӨdt
5
and resource consumption is A dt, so capacity updates as ct+1 = ct вҲ’A dt. If fulfilling demand
dt for some product would exhaust a resource, sales of that product are curtailed to respect the
capacity constraint. We work on a filtered probability space (в„Ұ, F, {Ft}T
t=0, P) where Ft encodes
all information available up to time t.
The fluid benchmark upper-bounds the expected revenue of any admissible policy:
Proposition 1 ((Gallego and Van Ryzin 1994)). For any policy ПҖ,
V Fluid(c0) вүҘE
h
T
X
t=1
(pt)вҠӨdti
.
Thus V Fluid(c0) is a natural performance benchmark. The regret of a policy ПҖ over horizon T
is
RegretT (ПҖ) = V Fluid(c0) вҲ’E
h
T
X
t=1
(pt)вҠӨdti
.
All policies solve the same constrained control problem and differ only in the demand informa-
tion available.
3
Boundary Attraction and Full-Information Regret
We begin with a calibrated demand predictionвҖ”the best-case scenario where the firmвҖҷs forecast is
exactвҖ”isolating the control difficulty near hard capacity boundaries before prediction error enters.
The boundary attraction mechanism developed here is not merely a full-information benchmark: it
reappears as a subroutine in every algorithm that follows, whether demand must be learned from
scratch (Section 4), guided by a prior (Section 5), or assisted by surrogate data (Section 6).
Even when the demand function f(p) = Оұ+Bp is known, resource constraints force a nontrivial
dynamic tradeoff. At each period, the decision-maker must balance immediate revenue against
future opportunity: selling too aggressively depletes resources needed later, while withholding
inventory wastes potential revenue.
Prior algorithms achieve logarithmic regret by repeatedly resolving the fluid problem (1), but
require strong non-degeneracy assumptions. For instance, Jasin (2014) assumes the dual LP has
a unique optimal vertex О»вҲ—and that perturbing the constraint right-hand side does not change
which constraints bind at optimality.
Wang and Wang (2022) relaxes this to c0 Мё= TdвҲ—,T (the
system is either overloaded or underloaded), but the regret bound scales as в„Ұ(
c0/T вҲ’dвҲ—,T вҲ’1).
In practice, however, degeneracy is pervasive (Bumpensanti and Wang 2020): many constraints
bind simultaneously, and the optimal dual solution need not be unique.
Under degeneracy, near-zero optimal demands cause dual multipliers to diverge, making the
system sensitive to small demand fluctuations.
We address this through a boundary attraction
mechanism: whenever an optimal demand component falls below a dynamic threshold О¶(T вҲ’t +
1)вҲ’1/2, we round it to zero and push the corresponding price toward its upper bound U. This
steers the system away from the degenerate region at a modest cost of O(О¶2 log T) additional
regret (Appendix D.1), while eliminating the unbounded dual variables that plague prior re-solving
approaches.
3.1
The Boundary Attraction Mechanism
When the fluid solution prescribes near-zero demand dвҲ—
j вүҲ0 for some product j, the corresponding
dual multiplier О»j вүҲ1/dвҲ—
j diverges. Traditional re-solve methods (Jasin 2014, Wang and Wang
6
Algorithm 1 Boundary Attracted Re-solve Method
1: Input: c1 = C, A, f(p) = Оұ + Bp, rounding threshold О¶.
2: for t = 1, . . . , T do
3:
Solve fluid model (2) for (pПҖ,t, dПҖ,t)
4:
Apply Boundary Attraction: Set Лңdt
i = dПҖ,t
i
if dПҖ,t
i
вүҘО¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2, else 0
5:
Set the candidate price ЛҶpt = BвҲ’1( Лңdt вҲ’Оұ), then implement pt = О [L,U]n(ЛҶpt)
6:
Observe demand ЛҶdt, update ct+1 = ct вҲ’A ЛҶdt
7: end for
2022) rely on first-order corrections proportional to О», which explode under degeneracy.
boundary attraction resolves this by rounding small demands to zero. When dвҲ—
j < О¶(T вҲ’t +
1)вҲ’1/2, we set Лңdj = 0 and push the corresponding price to its upper bound U, steering the system
away from regions where dual multipliers diverge. The attraction step truncates only near-zero
demands, and the resulting loss is second-order in the truncated quantity; this yields a per-period
loss of order O(О¶2/(T вҲ’t+1)), which sums to O(О¶2 log T)вҖ”a logarithmic cost. The threshold decays
as (T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2: as the horizon shrinks, the algorithm tolerates progressively smaller demands
without rounding (Figure 5 in Appendix B).
3.2
Algorithm Design
At each period, the algorithm proceeds in three steps: solve the fluid problem assuming no noise,
flag demands that fall below the threshold О¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2, and round those demands to zero
while pricing the remaining products at the fluid solution.
The threshold decays as (T вҲ’t +
1)вҲ’1/2 because stochastic fluctuations accumulate at rate
вҲҡ
T вҲ’t + 1. A larger threshold reduces
constraint violations but increases rounding loss; a smaller one captures more revenue but risks
infeasibility.
Formally, at each period t, the DM observes the remaining capacities ct and solves the fluid
model:
V Fluid
t
(ct) =
max
pвҲҲ[L,U]n
pвҠӨd
s.t.
d = Оұ + Bp,
Ad вүӨ
ct
T вҲ’t + 1,
(2)
yielding an optimal solution (pПҖ,t, dПҖ,t). We then round small demands to zero:
Лңdt
i =
(
dПҖ,t
i
if dПҖ,t
i
вүҘО¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2,
0
otherwise,
and set the candidate price ЛҶpt = BвҲ’1( ЛңdtвҲ’Оұ). If ЛҶpt leaves the feasible box, we clip it componentwise
to obtain pt = О [L,U]n(ЛҶpt); clipping only affects cases where the attraction step already pushes the
solution toward the price boundary. The (T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2 decay rate matches the scale at which
stochastic demand fluctuations accumulate over the remaining horizon, yielding O(О¶2 log T) regret
under high-probability concentration. When a resource is fully depleted (ct
i = 0), we reject all
future demand for products requiring that resource.
7
3.3
Regret Analysis
The regret bound reflects three sources of lossвҖ”the rounding cost (О¶2), the dimension (n2), and
the condition number вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2вҖ”all scaling with log T.
Theorem 2. For Algorithm 1 with О¶ вүҘ4Пғ2, the regret is bounded by:
RegretT  ПҖ

= O
 О¶2n2вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2 log T

.
The n2 factor reflects the nГ—n entries of B, while вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2 captures ill-conditioning: large values
indicate that demand responds sharply to price changes, amplifying perturbation losses. Once the
control layer is stabilized, degeneracy no longer forces the analysis to rely on structural regularity
assumptions.
The proof (Appendix D.1) telescopes over hybrid policies. For each period t, a hybrid policy
follows Algorithm 1 up to time t and then resolves optimally without noise for the remaining horizon.
The key step bounds the single-period revenue difference E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

.
Because small demands di вүҲ0 produce unbounded dual multipliers, we round them to zero pre-
emptively, moving the solution away from degenerate boundaries.
The analysis splits into three cases by demand magnitude.
For large demand (di вү«(T вҲ’
t + 1)вҲ’1/2), standard concentration inequalities suffice: the buffer region absorbs noise. For small
demand (di < О¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2), boundary attraction eliminates this case through rounding. For
moderate demand, the second-order growth condition yields locally strong concavity of revenue,
bounding perturbation losses. Each period contributes O(О¶2n2вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2/T); summing over T periods
yields the O(log T) bound. Unlike Jasin (2014) and Wang and Wang (2022), this approach requires
no non-degeneracy assumptions and avoids first-order correction terms.
With this control mechanism in place, we next study the cost of learning demand entirely
online.
4
Online Learning Without Prior Information
We now consider the opposite extreme: no demand prediction is available, and the demand function
must be learned entirely online. The algorithm inherits boundary attraction from Section 3 and
adds structured exploration. It also serves as the fallback policy when a forecast is too unreliable
to trust (Section 5).
When the demand function f(p) = Оұ+Bp is unknown, the decision-maker must simultaneously
learn the parameters and set prices under resource constraints, balancing exploration (estimating
Оұ, B from price experiments) against exploitation (using current estimates to maximize revenue)вҖ”
the classical learning-earning tradeoff. Resource constraints compound this tradeoff: the contin-
uous, high-dimensional state-action space makes dynamic programming intractable, and capacity
coupling across periods creates path-dependent dynamics.
Ensuring sufficient exploration is the central challenge. As Keskin and Zeevi (2014) show, a
myopic policy that always prices at the current estimated optimum leads to incomplete learning and
poor revenue. From (10), estimation error scales inversely with О»min(P t), the minimum eigenvalue
of the design matrix. This eigenvalue grows with the variance of historical prices (see (11)), so if
prices cluster too tightlyвҖ”always near the current estimate, for exampleвҖ”then О»min(P t) remains
small and estimation stagnates.
Our solution combines periodic re-solving with controlled perturbations. Every n periods, we re-
estimate parameters and re-solve the fluid problem, adding a structured perturbation Пғ0tвҲ’1/4etвҲ’kn
to the prices. Within each epoch, the perturbations for t вҲҲ{kn + 1, . . . , kn + n} ensure that the
8
differences pt вҲ’ptвҲ’1 вҲ’Xk form an orthogonal basis, where Xk = Лңpk вҲ’pkn anchors the epoch. This
orthogonality guarantees О»min(P t) вүі
вҲҡ
t, so estimation error decays at the optimal O(tвҲ’1/2) rate.
The tвҲ’1/4 perturbation scale balances exploration against exploitation, yielding the
вҲҡ
T regret rate.
4.1
Algorithm Design
Our approach combines ordinary least squares estimation on historical (price, demand) pairs, peri-
odic re-solving every n periods with updated estimates, and forced exploration through structured
perturbations to ensure price diversity.
As noted above, estimation error scales inversely with О»min(P t) (see Appendix A.2 for the full
regression formulas, equations (9)вҖ“(10), and equation (11)). To guarantee sufficient exploration,
instead of directly using the fluid-optimal price from V Fluid, we perturb the pricing strategy pt to
increase variance. Specifically, at time t, we set the desired price as
Лңpt = ptвҲ’1 + (Лңpk вҲ’pkn) + Пғ0tвҲ’1/4etвҲ’kn
for k = вҢҠ(t вҲ’1)/nвҢӢ, where Лңpk solves (2) with estimated parameters ЛҶОұkn+1, ЛҶBkn+1 and current
inventory ckn+1. The term (Лңpk вҲ’pkn) acts as momentum toward the re-solve solution and anchors
prices for periods kn+1, . . . , kn+n, balancing earning against learning. The temporal structure of
this periodic review process is depicted in Figure 6 (Appendix B). Appendix A.2 provides further
design rationale.
As in the full-information setting, boundary attraction rejects demand for products whose
predicted demand falls below a dynamic threshold. Here, the threshold О¶((T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/4 + tвҲ’1/4)
has two terms, each addressing a distinct error source. The (T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/4 term guards against
stochastic demand fluctuations accumulating over the remaining horizon, while the tвҲ’1/4 term
accounts for estimation error, which decays as O(tвҲ’1/2) but requires an O(tвҲ’1/4) threshold for
high-probability feasibility. Together, the two terms ensure robustness: estimation error dominates
early (small t), while noise dominates late (large T вҲ’t).
4.2
Regret Analysis
Theorem 3. For Algorithm 2, with threshold О¶ вүҘCn5/4 log3/2 nПғ0
вҲҡПғ log T for some constant C,
the regret is bounded by:
RegretT  ПҖ

= O

(О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)
вҲҡ
T

.
Remark 1 (Optimality and special cases). The O(
вҲҡ
T) rate is minimax-optimal. Without resource
constraints, i.e., setting A = 0 and c0 = вҲһ, we recover the unconstrained dynamic pricing problem
of Keskin and Zeevi (2014), where the в„Ұ(
вҲҡ
T) lower bound is tight. Our algorithm matches this
limit despite the added complexity of resource constraints. The coefficient (О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2) separates
two costs: О¶2 is the price of boundary attraction for maintaining feasibility, while вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2 measures
how ill-conditioned the demand model is. Theorem 3 therefore characterizes the worst-case cost of
learning demand entirely online.
We now sketch the proof of Theorem 3; full details appear in Appendix E.1. Without loss of
generality, assume T = nT вҖІ for some integer T вҖІ > 0. The first step parallels the proof of Theorem
2: we split the regret as
RegretT  ПҖ

= E
" T вҖІ
X
k=1
RT (Hybridk, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridk+1, FT )
#
,
9
Algorithm 2 Periodic-Review Re-solve with Parameter Learning
1: Input: Initial capacity c1 = C, constraint matrix A, perturbation scale Пғ0, threshold О¶.
2: for t = 1, . . . , n do
3:
Sample pt uniformly from [L, U]n to initialize exploration.
4: end for
5: Compute initial average price pn = 1
n
Pn
t=1 pt.
6: for t = n + 1, . . . , T do
7:
if
mod (t, n) = 1 then
8:
Set block index k = вҢҠ(t вҲ’1)/nвҢӢ.
9:
Estimate ЛҶОұkn+1 and ЛҶBkn+1 using regression on historical data.
10:
Solve the estimated fluid model with current capacity ckn+1 to obtain Лңpk.
11:
end if
12:
Set price pt = ptвҲ’1 + (Лңpk вҲ’pkn) + Пғ0tвҲ’1/4etвҲ’kn.
13:
Compute predicted demand Лңdt = ЛҶОұkn+1 + ЛҶBkn+1pt.
14:
Define rejection set It
r = {i вҲҲ[n] : Лңdt
i вүӨО¶((T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/4 + tвҲ’1/4)}.
15:
Observe actual demand ЛҶdt = f(pt) + Пөt, and reject demands in It
r.
16:
Update capacity ct+1 = ct вҲ’A ЛҶdt.
17:
Update average price pt = tвҲ’1
t ptвҲ’1 + 1
t pt.
18: end for
where RT (Hybridk, FT ) denotes the total revenue of the hybrid policy defined as using Algorithm
2 up to time kn and getting the remaining revenue by solving (2) directly without noise. Unlike
in Theorem 2, the true parameters and fluid-optimal solutions are unavailable. We must therefore
bound the estimation error of ЛҶОұkn+1, ЛҶBkn+1 relative to Оұ, B. A stability result for strongly concave
constrained programs (Bonnans and Shapiro 2013, Prop. 4.32) implies that Dist
  ЛҶd, DПҖ,t
is bounded
linearly by
B вҲ’ЛҶB

2 + вҲҘОұ вҲ’ЛҶОұвҲҘ2. The structured perturbations ensure О»min(P t) вүі
вҲҡ
t via (11), so
the parameter error decays at rate O(tвҲ’1/2). Combining this with the noise analysis from Theorem
2 yields the final bound.
We provide a matching lower bound: the O(
вҲҡ
T) rate is optimal up to constant factors; more-
over, this holds for any given tuple of problem parameters. Formally, Keskin and Zeevi (2014)
establish that even in the unconstrained case,
Lemma 4 (Keskin and Zeevi 2014). There exists a finite positive constant c > 0 such that
RegretT  ПҖ

вүҘc
вҲҡ
T for any online policy ПҖ.
This lower bound applies a fortiori to our resource-constrained setting, since dropping the
constraints can only reduce regret. Theorem 3 is therefore rate-optimal.
This benchmark clarifies what offline information must beat. We next study the informed-price
setting, where a certified prior observation can affect the operating point itself; Section 6 then turns
to surrogate information, which instead improves estimation.
5
Informed Prices with Error Certification
Between calibrated demand and complete ignorance lies a practically important middle ground:
the firm has a demand forecast (p0, d0) from historical operations, a pilot study, or a predictive
model, with a certified error bound вҲҘd0 вҲ’f(p0)вҲҘ2 вүӨПө0. We call such a forecast a certified anchor.
10
An accurate anchor can change the regret regime because it changes the operating point itself.
Under hard capacity constraints, however, that also makes it dangerous when wrong. If the anchor
is accurate, we should approach the logarithmic performance of the full-information benchmark; if
it is inaccurate, we should not do worse than O(
вҲҡ
T). The central question is therefore not whether
the anchor helps in principle, but when it is accurate enough to trust.
This interpolation exhibits a sharp phase transition at Пө0 вүҲT вҲ’1/4, driven by two competing
error sources. If the algorithm trusts the informed price but the observation is inaccurate, the
resulting bias accumulates as O((Пө0)2T); if it instead learns from scratch, the cost of learning is
O(
вҲҡ
T). The transition occurs where these two costs balance:
(Пө0)2T вүҲ
вҲҡ
T
вҮ’
Пө0 вүҲT вҲ’1/4.
Below this threshold (Пө0 < T вҲ’1/4), exploiting the informed price yields O(log T) regret. Above
it (Пө0 > T вҲ’1/4), learning from scratch at rate O(
вҲҡ
T) is preferable.
For a typical horizon of
T = 10,000 periods, the threshold is Пө0 вүҲ0.1вҖ”meaning the forecast must predict demand to
within 10% accuracy to unlock logarithmic regret. Investing in better demand prediction pays off
only if the forecast error can be driven below this T вҲ’1/4 threshold.
What makes the informed price usable is certification: knowing Пө0. Without this information,
an algorithm cannot determine how much to trust the anchor versus continuing to explore. Any
algorithm that lacks this certificate cannot achieve better than Оҳ(
вҲҡ
T) worst-case regret.
5.1
Why Error Certification Is Necessary
Without knowing Пө0, an algorithm faces a dilemma: trust the anchor (risking that bias from the
wrong model accumulates over time) or learn from scratch (forgoing the potential benefit of a good
prior). Unable to resolve this dilemma, any such algorithm must hedge, achieving only Оҳ(
вҲҡ
T)
worst-case regret.
Proposition 5. There exist parameter sets (Оұ, B) and (ОұвҖІ, BвҖІ) such that, for any policy ПҖ lacking
knowledge of Пө0, if ПҖ achieves regret O(T Оі) for some Оі вҲҲ(0, 1) on (Оұ, B), it incurs regret в„Ұ(T 1вҲ’Оі)
on (ОұвҖІ, BвҖІ).
The proof (see Appendix F) constructs two adversarial instances indistinguishable from (p0, d0):
in the first, Пө0 is small and the optimal algorithm exploits the anchor to achieve O(log T); in the
second, Пө0 is large and the optimal algorithm learns from scratch at rate O(
вҲҡ
T). Since (p0, d0)
looks identical in both cases, any algorithm without knowledge of Пө0 achieves Оҳ(
вҲҡ
T) (see Figure 7
in Appendix B for a visualization of this decision logic).
The same logic underlies the consistency-robustness tradeoff in learning-augmented algorithms
(Lykouris and Vassilvitskii 2021, Mitzenmacher and Vassilvitskii 2022): to beat the baseline using
predictions, one must know the prediction quality. Here, the anchor (p0, d0) plays the role of the
prediction, and Пө0 quantifies its quality.
5.2
Algorithm Design
Given Пө0, we implement a consistency-robustness switch. First, we check whether (Пө0)2T > П„
вҲҡ
T
for a tuning parameter П„. If this condition holds, the informed price is too noisy to trust, so we
revert to Algorithm 2 (the no-information policy). Otherwise, we anchor estimation at (p0, d0) and
exploit the certified prior.
11
Algorithm 3 Certified-Anchor Estimate-then-Select Re-solve
1: Input: Initial capacity c1 = C, matrix A, error bound Пө0, tolerance П„, perturbation scale Пғ0,
threshold О¶.
2: if (Пө0)2T > П„
вҲҡ
T then
3:
Switch to Algorithm 2 (no-information setting).
4: end if
5: for t = 1, . . . , T do
6:
Compute ЛҶBt using regression anchored at (p0, d0).
7:
Solve the estimated fluid model ЛҶV Fluid
t
(ct) with ЛҶBt and ct.
8:
Perturb the solution: Лңpt вҶҗЛңpt + Пғ0sgn(Лңpt вҲ’p0)tвҲ’1/2e mod (t,n).
9:
Compute predicted demand Лңdt = d0 + ЛҶBt(Лңpt вҲ’p0).
10:
Define rejection set It
r = {i вҲҲ[n] : Лңdt
i вүӨО¶((T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2 + tвҲ’1/2)}.
11:
Observe ЛҶdt = f(Лңpt) + Пөt, reject demands in It
r, and update ct+1 = ct вҲ’A ЛҶdt.
12: end for
We estimate B using (p0, d0) as a reference point:
ЛҶBt =
 tвҲ’1
X
s=1
(ps вҲ’p0)(ps вҲ’p0)вҠӨ
!вҖ  tвҲ’1
X
s=1
(ds вҲ’d0)(ps вҲ’p0)вҠӨ.
(3)
This centering removes the intercept term Оұ, reducing the estimation problem from (n + 1) Г— n
parameters to n Г— n. When Пө0 is small, d0 вүҲОұ + Bp0, so this approach yields accurate estimates
of B with fewer samples. We still add small perturbations Пғ0tвҲ’1/4sgn(Лңpt вҲ’p0)e mod (t,n) to ensure
sufficient exploration, but these decay faster than in the no-information case. The directional term
sgn(Лңpt вҲ’p0) perturbs away from the informed price p0вҖ”upward when the fluid solution exceeds
p0, downward otherwiseвҖ”exploiting the reference point for faster convergence when Пө0 is small.
5.3
Regret Analysis
Theorem 6. For Algorithm 3, the regret is bounded by:
RegretT  ПҖ

= O

min
n
П„
вҲҡ
T, (Пө0)2T + (О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)Пғ2 log T
o
.
Theorem 6 quantifies the value of the informed price. Unlike the surrogate signals studied in
Section 6, a certified anchor can improve the regret regime itself because it changes the operating
point rather than only the estimator. The first term, П„
вҲҡ
T, is the robust fallback from the no-
information setting. The second term captures the benefit and risk of trusting the anchor: the
initial error Пө0 contributes a bias of order (Пө0)2T, while the logarithmic term is the same stochastic
cost present in the full-information bound.
When Пө0 = 0, we recover O(log T) (full-information); as Пө0 increases past T вҲ’1/4, the bound
converges to O(
вҲҡ
T) (no-information). This interpolation is tight:
Proposition 7. There exist instances where any policy without knowledge of Пө0 incurs regret
в„Ұ(max{П„
вҲҡ
T, (Пө0)2T}), matching the upper bound in Theorem 6.
Together, these results identify exactly when prior information can change the operating point:
only when the anchor is certified tightly enough to beat the learning baseline. We next turn to
surrogate models, which should not set prices directly but can still reduce the statistical cost of
learning.
12
6
Variance Reduction via Surrogate Models
The certified forecast of Section 5 requires a prediction accurate enough to change the operating
point. We now study a weaker but more common form of prediction. Firms routinely maintain
demand models based on historical data, customer features, and contextual signals. Such models
may be too biased to set prices directly, but they can still reduce the variance of online estimation
through their correlation with true demand.
The role of a surrogate is indirect: it improves the estimator, not the action. We show that
offline surrogate models, despite potential bias or misspecification, can reduce estimation variance
and improve the constants in the O(
вҲҡ
T) regret bound. We do not require the surrogate to be
unbiased or even to preserve the ranking of demands across prices. The key requirement is merely
informative correlation: the surrogate predictions must be non-trivially correlated with the true
demand.
6.1
Problem Setup and Offline Surrogate Model
Prior to deployment, the firm has collected an offline dataset Doff = {zi}N
i=1 of side information (e.g.,
customer features, context variables) that does not include realized demand under the candidate
prices P = {p(1), . . . , p(K)} вҠӮ[L, U]n. A pre-existing predictive model provides a demand surrogate
Sd(z, p) вҲҲRn, trained offline on historical data from a different pricing policy. Here z denotes
observable side information at deployment time (e.g., demographics, seasonality, traffic patterns).
The framework accommodates misspecification: the surrogate may systematically over- or un-
derestimate demand. We correct for bias by centering (subtracting the surrogateвҖҷs mean via offline
data) and applying control variates (using the centered surrogate to reduce variance, not to predict
directly). Formally, we allow the surrogate to be biasedвҖ”E[Sd(zt, pt)] Мё= E[dt | pt]вҖ”and require
only informative correlation:
Assumption 3 (Informative correlation). For each price p вҲҲP, the surrogate St(p) := Sd(zt, p)
and the demand dt satisfy
Cov(dt, St(p) | pt = p) Мё= 0.
In addition, the surrogate covariance matrix is non-degenerate:
ОЈS(p) := Var(St(p) | pt = p) вү»0,
вҲҖp вҲҲP.
This condition ensures that the surrogate carries non-trivial information about demand fluctu-
ations, even if the mean is misaligned, and that the control-variate coefficient О“вӢҶ(p) is well-defined.
We also require a quasi-uniform offline coverage condition (Appendix G.1), guaranteeing that the
offline price design covariance is bounded away from singularity; this is the standard richness con-
dition for MLA estimation.
Remark 2 (How much correlation suffices?). Variance reduction Vareff вүҲ(1 вҲ’ПҒ2)Var implies:
ПҒ = 0.5 yields 25% reduction, ПҒ = 0.7 yields 49%, and ПҒ = 0.9 yields 81%. Experiments (Section 7)
show that meaningful regret reduction (> 5%) requires ПҒ вүҘ0.5. Surrogates with ПҒ < 0.3 provide
negligible benefit and may not justify deployment overhead.
6.2
Variance Reduction via Control Variates
We adapt classical control variates: given a correlated variable X with known mean, the estimator
ЛңY = Y вҲ’ОІ(X вҲ’E[X]) is unbiased with reduced variance when X and Y are correlated. Applying
13
this to (dt, St(pt)) pairs, let ЛҮSt(p) denote a centered version of the surrogate, obtained by subtracting
an offline reference mean:
ЛҮSt(p) := St(p) вҲ’ВҜm(p),
where ВҜm(p) is an estimate of the surrogate mean E[St(p)] computed from the offline dataset Doff.
The centered surrogate ЛҮSt(p) has approximately zero mean when averaged over the offline distri-
bution, enabling variance reduction. For a given price pt, we define the pseudo-observation
edt := dt вҲ’О“(pt) ЛҮSt(pt),
(4)
where О“(p) вҲҲRnГ—n is a matrix that linearly combines the demand and the centered surrogate. The
variance of edt (conditionally on pt = p) is minimized when
О“вӢҶ(p) = ОЈdS(p) ОЈS(p)вҲ’1,
where ОЈdS(p) := Cov(dt, St(p)вҠӨ| pt = p) is the cross-covariance and ОЈS(p) := Var(St(p) | pt = p) is
the surrogateвҖҷs covariance matrix. With this optimal choice, the variance of the pseudo-observation
is given by the Schur complement:
Var(edt | pt = p) = ОЈd(p) вҲ’ОЈdS(p)ОЈS(p)вҲ’1ОЈSd(p),
(5)
which is strictly smaller than the original demand variance ОЈd(p) whenever ОЈdS(p) Мё= 0 and ОЈS(p) вү»
0 (by Assumption 3).
See Figure 8 in Appendix B for a conceptual overview of this variance
reduction process.
This is the residual variance after removing the component of dt predictable from St(p). For
the special case of scalar targets (e.g., revenue rt = pвҠӨ
t dt), the variance reduction simplifies to
Var(ert | pt = p) = Пғ2
r(p)(1 вҲ’ПҒ(p)2), where ПҒ(p) := Corr(rt, St(p) | pt = p); see Appendix G.2 for a
worked numerical example.
6.3
Surrogate-Assisted Anytime Regression
Estimating the control variate coefficient.
We estimate the surrogate mean mвӢҶ(p) and the
coefficient О“вӢҶvia regularized regression. Under a linear kernel, the estimator reduces to regularized
OLS with feature dimension Dfeat вүҲn, ensuring estimation error of order O(n log T) that preserves
the optimal regret rate:
bО“t := bОЈdS,t (bОЈoff
S + О»I)вҲ’1,
(6)
where О» > 0 is a regularization parameter.
Anytime OLS with pseudo-observations.
At time t, the DM forms the pseudo-observation
edt := dt вҲ’bО“t(pt) ЛҮSt(pt)
and then applies standard ordinary least squares (OLS) to estimate (Оұ, B). Specifically, for each
product j = 1, . . . , n, let xs = [1; ps] вҲҲR1+n and P t = Pt
s=1 xsxвҠӨ
s . The estimator is
"
bОұt
j
bОІt
j
#
= (P t)вҲ’1
t
X
s=1
" eds
j
eds
j ps
#
,
bBt := [bОІt
1, . . . , bОІt
n]вҠӨ.
(7)
This surrogate-assisted OLS replaces the raw demand ds in the baseline no-information algorithm
(Algorithm 2) with the variance-reduced pseudo-observation eds.
14
6.4
Regret analysis
The estimation error has two components: an oracle variance floor Varorc (the Schur complement
(5), irreducible even with the true О“вӢҶ) and an empirical error from the plug-in bО“t(p) differing from
О“вӢҶ(p) due to finite samples and centering mismatch. Unlike a certified prior, surrogate assistance
typically does not change the regret regime by itself; it lowers the variance within the O(
вҲҡ
T)
learning rate.
Theorem 8 (Regret with Surrogate Assistance). Consider Algorithm 2 modified to use surrogate-
assisted pseudo-observations (4) in the OLS estimator (7). Suppose the residuals (dtвҲ’Вөd(pt), St(pt)вҲ’
mвӢҶ(pt)) are jointly Gaussian with covariance matrix
 ОЈd(p)
ОЈdS(p)
ОЈSd(p)
ОЈS(p)

for each p, and let the of-
fline surrogate data satisfy a quasi-uniform coverage condition (detailed in Appendix G.1). Under
the parametric assumption that the control variate coefficient О“вӢҶ(p) is constant and mвӢҶ(p) is linear,
the expected regret satisfies
E[RegretT (ПҖ)] = O

(О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2) В·

Пғeff
вҲҡ
T + n log T + nT
N

,
(8)
where Пғ2
eff := supp О»max(ОЈd(p) вҲ’ОЈdS(p)ОЈS(p)вҲ’1ОЈSd(p)) is the oracle variance from the Schur com-
plement (5). The term n log T + nT
N
accounts for estimating the control variate coefficient and
centering.
The leading term Пғeff
вҲҡ
T is the oracle regret floorвҖ”strictly smaller than the baseline O(
q
Пғ2
d В· T)
in Theorem 3 by a factor of
p
1 вҲ’ПҒ2 in the scalar case. The remaining terms n log T +nT/N capture
the cost of estimating the control variate parameters and centering; these are negligible when
N вү«
вҲҡ
T. Theorem 8 shows that biased surrogates help by shrinking the learning variance rather
than by directly selecting prices. The proof follows the framework of Theorem 3 but replaces Пғ2
d
with Varorc in the self-normalized concentration step; see Appendix G.1 for the complete argument
and Appendix G.2 for a proof sketch.
Informed priors and surrogates are complementary but not interchangeable. A certified prior
can improve the regret regime when reliable enough; a surrogate uses abundant but potentially
misspecified offline data to improve the constant in the learning term.
In practice, priors suit
settings where a trustworthy benchmark is available with quantifiable error, while surrogates suit
settings where offline data is plentiful but its quality is uncertain.
6.5
Surrogate-assisted informed pricing
The two forms of offline information can be combined: the certified prior improves the regime, while
the surrogate shrinks the learning term inside that regime. We now combine the informed-price
approach of Section 5 with the surrogate assistance developed above.
Consider the setting where the firm uses the surrogate model to construct an initial informed
price p0 and demand estimate d0 = E[Sd(z, p0)]. If the surrogateвҖҷs bias is bounded by Пө0, i.e.,
вҲҘE[Sd(z, p0)] вҲ’f(p0)вҲҘ2 вүӨПө0, we can adapt the Estimate-then-Select strategy (Algorithm 3) to use
surrogate-assisted estimation.
Theorem 9 (Regret with Surrogate and Informed Prior). Consider Algorithm 3 where the OLS
estimator is replaced by the surrogate-assisted estimator (7) anchored at (p0, d0). The expected
regret satisfies:
E[RegretT (ПҖ)] = O

min
n
Пғeff
вҲҡ
T, (Пө0)2T + (О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)(Пғ2 + Пғ2
eff) log T
o
+ n2 log T + n2T
N

.
15
Theorem 9 stacks the two benefits. If the anchor is too biased (Пө0 large), the policy falls back
to a surrogate-assisted O(Пғeff
вҲҡ
T) learning regime. If the anchor is accurate (Пө0 small), we retain
logarithmic regret.
Comparing with Theorem 6, the stochastic noise component is unchanged,
while the learning component improves from Пғ2 to Пғ2
effвҖ”a reduction by the ratio Пғ2
eff/Пғ2 < 1. The
additive terms n2 log T + n2T/N capture the cost of learning the surrogate relationship in the
anchored matrix-valued regression step; these are negligible when N вү«T/ log T.
Discussion.
The Schur complement formula (5) shows that correlation matters more than ac-
curacy: a high-correlation, moderately biased surrogate outperforms a low-correlation, low-bias
predictor.
The framework therefore applies whenever firms maintain predictive models trained
on historical or auxiliary data, even under distributional shifts and model misspecification (see
Appendix G.2 for further discussion).
7
Numerical Experiments
We validate the theoretical predictions through simulated pricing experiments, examining regret
scaling across information regimes, the phase transition in the informed-price setting, and the
variance reduction from surrogate signals.
Experimental setup.
We use two problem scales. Scale 1 (m = 10 resources, n = 20 prod-
ucts) has sufficient dimensionality to exhibit asymptotic regret scaling (O(log T) versus O(
вҲҡ
T))
while remaining computationally tractable. Scale 2 (m = 1 resource, n = 4 products) permits
extensive replication (500 runs per configuration), which reduces standard errors enough to detect
performance differences between algorithms.
We generate random instances as follows.
The consumption matrix A вҲҲRmГ—n
+
has entries
drawn i.i.d. from Uniform[0, 1]. Demand parameters are sampled with Оұi вҲјUniform[5, 10] and
Bij вҲјUniform[вҲ’1, 0]. To satisfy Assumption 2, we shift the diagonal entries of B by subtracting the
largest eigenvalue of (B+BвҠӨ)/2. Initial capacities are c0 = AdвҲ—, where dвҲ—= arg maxdвүҘ0 dвҠӨBвҲ’1(dвҲ’
Оұ) is the unconstrained optimal demand. This ensures resource constraints actively bind under
optimal pricing. We add i.i.d. Gaussian observation noise N(0, Пғ2) and set perturbation scale
Пғ0 = 1 for all algorithms. Unless stated otherwise, we use threshold parameter О¶ = 1, noise level
Пғ = 1, and (for informed-price algorithm) initial error Пө0 = 0.1. Appendix C lists all experimental
parameters.
Regret scaling validation.
We first verify that regret scales according to the theoretical pre-
dictions (Scale 1:
m = 10, n = 20).
Figure 2 plots regret against the time horizon T вҲҲ
{50, 100, 200, 400, 800, 1600} for the full-information, no-information, and informed-price settings,
with Пғ = 1 and Пө0 = T вҲ’1/2 in the informed case. Each point averages 100 independent runs; error
bars show Вұ1 standard deviation.
The observed rates match the theory. Full-information regret (Figure 2a) grows as O(log T):
it stays nearly constant across horizonsвҖ”the cost of stochastic constraint management alone. No-
information regret (Figure 2b) scales as O(
вҲҡ
T), matching the minimax rate. Informed-price regret
(Figure 2c) with Пө0 = T вҲ’1/2 вүӘT вҲ’1/4 stays nearly flat, confirming the phase transition predicted
by Theorem 6: when the initial estimate is accurate enough, regret drops from O(
вҲҡ
T) to O(log T).
These patterns are robust across randomly generated instances. Regret grows linearly in the
noise standard deviation Пғ but remains subquadratic even when Пғ increases 50-fold (Appendix C).
On instances where all fluid-optimal demands are bounded away from zero, the boundary attraction
16
threshold О¶ has little effect: performance is stable across О¶ вҲҲ[0.5, 2] and degrades only at О¶ вүҘ5
(Appendix C.2.2). When some demand components are near zero, however, boundary attraction
with О¶ вҲҲ[1, 3] sharply reduces regret from demand-floor bias (Appendix C.2.2).
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Time horizon T
20
10
0
10
20
Regret
(a) Full Information: O(logT)
a + blogT fit
Full Information
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Time horizon T
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
80000
90000
(b) Learning: O(
p
T)
a + b
p
T fit
Learning (No Info)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Time horizon T
14000
15000
16000
17000
18000
(c) Informed Pricing: O(logT)
a + blogT fit
Informed Pricing
Figure 2: Regret scaling across time horizons T confirms theoretical predictions: (a) full information
grows as O(log T), (b) no information scales as O(
вҲҡ
T), and (c) informed price with Пө0 = T вҲ’1/2
recovers near-logarithmic regret.
Combining informed prices and surrogate assistance.
We next quantify how informed
prices and offline surrogates contribute, individually and jointly. We compare five algorithms on
Scale 2 (m = 1 resource, n = 4 products) with 500 replications per configuration:
(i) Full-Information (Oracle): Algorithm 1 with known demand model, serving as a lower
bound on achievable regret.
(ii) Surrogate+Informed: Algorithm 3 augmented with surrogate-assisted estimation (Sec-
tion 6).
(iii) Informed Price: Algorithm 3 with initial error Пө0 = 0.12.
(iv) Surrogate: Algorithm 2 with surrogate-assisted estimation (Section 6).
(v) Learning (Baseline): Algorithm 2 with no prior information.
We set Пғ = 2.2 and surrogate correlation ПҒ = 0.65. Figure 3 plots regret trajectories across
T вҲҲ{200, 400, 600, 800, 1000}.
Table 1 reports results at T = 200. The ranking Learning > Surrogate > Informed > Surro-
gate+Informed is consistent across replications. The two information channels are complementary:
combining them reduces regret below either channel alone, the surrogate reduces estimation vari-
ance (Section 6) while the informed anchor reduces bias (Section 5). As T grows, the gap between
algorithms widens (Figure 3); complete results across all horizons appear in Appendix C.3.
Value of informed prices.
Theorem 6 predicts a phase transition at Пө0 вүҲT вҲ’1/4: below this
threshold, regret grows as O((Пө0)2T + log T); above it, the informed observation is too noisy to
help and regret reverts to O(
вҲҡ
T).
Figure 4 confirms the prediction: for each T, mean regret
(300 replications) rises from the log T floor through the quadratic regime and saturates at the
вҲҡ
T
ceiling. The transition sharpens with T, and the inflection points cluster near Пө0 вүҲT вҲ’1/4 (see also
Figure 11 in Appendix C.4).
17
Table 1: Algorithm performance comparison at T = 200 (500 replications, Scale 2: m = 1, n = 4,
Пғ = 2.2).
Algorithm
Mean Regret
Full-Information (Oracle)
7.31 Вұ 81.6
Surrogate+Informed
303.91 Вұ 112.7
Informed Price
328.61 Вұ 112.4
Surrogate
452.69 Вұ 191.9
Learning (Baseline)
530.36 Вұ 227.0
Value of surrogate assistance.
The control-variate construction of Section 6 reduces estimation
variance by a factor (1вҲ’ПҒ2), where ПҒ is the correlation between surrogate and true demand. Because
the reduction depends on correlation aloneвҖ”not on mean or slope accuracyвҖ”misspecified surrogates
with ПҒ > 0 still help. With N = 500 offline observations and 20% parameter misspecification, regret
decreases monotonically with ПҒ (Figure 12 in Appendix C.4), matching the (1 вҲ’ПҒ2) prediction.
8
Conclusions
This paper studies how prediction uncertainty propagates into constrained dynamic pricing. Our
framework separates the problem into three layers: stabilizing pricing near degenerate capacity
boundaries (boundary attraction), determining when a forecast is reliable enough to shift the regret
regime (the phase transition at Пө0 вүҲT вҲ’1/4), and extracting value from biased predictions through
variance reduction rather than direct price recommendation.
The results produce a clear hierarchy: O(
вҲҡ
T) regret without predictions, O(log T) with an ac-
curate forecast, and a (1вҲ’ПҒ2) variance reduction factor from correlated surrogates that compounds
with either regime. The phase transition threshold is tightвҖ”no algorithm can improve on O(
вҲҡ
T)
when Пө0 вү«T вҲ’1/4вҖ”giving a precise answer to when a demand forecast is worth trusting.
For practitioners, the operational guidelines are concrete: set the boundary attraction threshold
conservatively (О¶ вҲҲ[1, 5]); trust a demand forecast only when its error bound is on the order of T вҲ’1/4
or smaller; and use surrogate models as variance-reducing instruments, not price recommendations,
with gains becoming substantial around ПҒ вүҘ0.5.
The analysis assumes linear demand. Three extensions would broaden applicability: certifying
prediction reliability when Пө0 is not known a priori, extending the framework to nonlinear or
contextual demand models, and exploiting richer surrogate structuresвҖ”such as neural network
simulatorsвҖ”while preserving constraint feasibility.
References
Abbasi-Yadkori Y, PВҙal D, SzepesvВҙari C (2011) Improved algorithms for linear stochastic bandits. Advances
in neural information processing systems 24.
Agrawal S, Devanur N (2016) Linear contextual bandits with knapsacks. Advances in neural information
processing systems 29.
Agrawal S, Devanur NR, Li L (2016) An efficient algorithm for contextual bandits with knapsacks, and an
extension to concave objectives. Conference on Learning Theory, 4вҖ“18 (PMLR).
Ao R, Chen H, Gao S, Li H, Simchi-Levi D (2026a) Best arm identification with llm judges and limited
human. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.21471 .
18
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
Time horizon T
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Regret
Algorithm Comparison (m = 1, n = 4, Пғ = 2.2)
O(
p
T) ref
Full Information
Surrogate+Informed
Informed Pricing
Surrogate-Assisted
Learning (No Info)
Figure 3: Regret trajectories for the five algorithms on Scale 2 (m = 1, n = 4, Пғ = 2.2, 500
replications). Shaded regions show Вұ1 standard deviation. Combining both information channels
(Surrogate+Informed) yields the lowest regret; the separation between algorithms grows with T.
Ao R, Chen H, Gao S, Li H, Simchi-Levi D (2026b) Designing service systems from textual evidence. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2603.10400 .
Ao R, Chen H, Liu H, Simchi-Levi D, Sun WW (2026c) Ppi-svrg: Unifying prediction-powered inference
and variance reduction for semi-supervised optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.21470 .
Ao R, Chen H, Simchi-Levi D, Zhu F (2024a) Online local false discovery rate control: A resource allocation
approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11425 .
Ao R, Fu H, Simchi-Levi D (2024b) Two-stage online reusable resource allocation: Reservation, overbooking
and confirmation call. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.15245 .
Ao R, Jiang J, Simchi-Levi D (2025a) Learning to price with resource constraints: from full information
to machine-learned prices. The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems.
Ao R, Luo G, Simchi-Levi D, Wang X (2025b) Optimizing llm inference: Fluid-guided online scheduling
with memory constraints. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.11320.
Ao R, Simchi-Levi D, Wang X (2026d) Optirepair: Closed-loop diagnosis and repair of supply chain opti-
mization models with llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.19439 .
Ao R, Simchi-Levi D, Wang X (2026e) Solver-in-the-loop: Mdp-based benchmarks for self-correction and
behavioral rationality in operations research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.21008 .
Badanidiyuru A, Langford J, Slivkins A (2014) Resourceful contextual bandits. Conference on Learning
Theory, 1109вҖ“1134 (PMLR).
Baek J, Chen Y, Chi Z, Ma W (2026a) Evaluating llm-persona generated distributions for decision-making.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.06357 .
Baek J, Fu Y, Ma W, Peng T (2026b) Ai agents for inventory control: Human-llm-or complementarity. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2602.12631 .
Bhaskara A, Cutkosky A, Kumar R, Purohit M (2020) Online linear optimization with many hints. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.03082.
19
10 2
10 1
100
Initial error bound Пө0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Regret
O((Пө0)2T + logT)
O(
p
T)
Пө0 вүҲT вҲ’1/4
T = 400
T = 800
T = 1600
T = 3200
Figure 4: Phase transition in informed-price regret (300 replications per point; error bars: Вұ1 SE).
Below Пө0 вүҲT вҲ’1/4 (dashed vertical), regret stays near the O(log T) floor; above it, regret rises to the
O(
вҲҡ
T) baseline (dashed horizontal). The transition sharpens with T, consistent with Theorem 6.
Bhaskara A, Cutkosky A, Kumar R, Purohit M (2021) Logarithmic regret from sublinear hints. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2111.05257.
Bhaskara A, Cutkosky A, Kumar R, Purohit M (2023) Bandit online linear optimization with hints and
queries. Krause A, Brunskill E, Cho K, Engelhardt B, Sabato S, Scarlett J, eds., Proceedings of the
40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, 2313вҖ“2336 (PMLR), URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/bhaskara23a.html.
Bonnans JF, Shapiro A (2013) Perturbation analysis of optimization problems (Springer Science & Business
Media).
Boyd S, Vandenberghe L (2004) Convex optimization (Cambridge university press).
Bu J, Simchi-Levi D, Xu Y (2020) Online pricing with offline data: Phase transition and inverse square law.
International Conference on Machine Learning, 1202вҖ“1210 (PMLR).
Bumpensanti P, Wang H (2020) A re-solving heuristic with uniformly bounded loss for network revenue
management. Management Science 66(7):2993вҖ“3009.
Chen Z, Ai R, Yang M, Pan Y, Wang C, Deng X (2024) Contextual decision-making with knapsacks beyond
the worst case. The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=Dgt6sh2ruQ.
Cheung WC, Lyu L (2024) Leveraging (biased) information: Multi-armed bandits with offline data. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.02594 .
Duan Y, Hu Y, Jiang J (2025) Ask, clarify, optimize: Human-llm agent collaboration for smarter inventory
control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.00121 .
Ferreira KJ, Simchi-Levi D, Wang H (2018) Online network revenue management using thompson sampling.
Operations research 66(6):1586вҖ“1602.
Gallego G, Van Ryzin G (1994) Optimal dynamic pricing of inventories with stochastic demand over finite
horizons. Management science 40(8):999вҖ“1020.
Jasin S (2014) Reoptimization and self-adjusting price control for network revenue management. Operations
Research 62(5):1168вҖ“1178.
20
Javanmard A, Nazerzadeh H (2019) Dynamic pricing in high-dimensions. Journal of Machine Learning
Research 20(9):1вҖ“49.
Jiang J, Ma W, Zhang J (2025) Degeneracy is ok: Logarithmic regret for network revenue management with
indiscrete distributions. Operations Research .
Jiang J, Zhang M (2025) An lp-based approach for bilinear saddle point problem with instance-dependent
guarantee and noisy feedback. Available at SSRN 5465554 .
Keskin NB, Zeevi A (2014) Dynamic pricing with an unknown demand model: Asymptotically optimal
semi-myopic policies. Operations research 62(5):1142вҖ“1167.
Lattimore T, SzepesvВҙari C (2020) Bandit algorithms (Cambridge University Press).
Li X, Ye Y (2022) Online linear programming: Dual convergence, new algorithms, and regret bounds.
Operations Research 70(5):2948вҖ“2966.
Li Y, Xie H, Lin Y, Lui JC (2021) Unifying offline causal inference and online bandit learning for data driven
decision. Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, 2291вҖ“2303.
Liang K, Lu Y, Mao J, Sun S, Yang C, Zeng C, Jin X, Qin H, Zhu R, Teo CP (2026) Large-scale opti-
mization model auto-formulation: Harnessing llm flexibility via structured workflow. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2601.09635 .
Liu H, Grigas P (2022) Online contextual decision-making with a smart predict-then-optimize method. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2206.07316 .
Liu S, Jiang J, Li X (2022) Non-stationary bandits with knapsacks. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 35:16522вҖ“16532.
Lykouris T, Vassilvitskii S (2021) Competitive caching with machine learned advice. Journal of the ACM
(JACM) 68(4):1вҖ“25.
Ma W, Xia D, Jiang J (2024) High-dimensional linear bandits with knapsacks. International Conference on
Machine Learning, 34008вҖ“34037 (PMLR).
Mitzenmacher M, Vassilvitskii S (2022) Algorithms with predictions. Communications of the ACM 65(7):33вҖ“
35.
Purohit M, Svitkina Z, Kumar R (2018) Improving online algorithms via ml predictions. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 31.
Sankararaman KA, Slivkins A (2021) Bandits with knapsacks beyond the worst case. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 34:23191вҖ“23204.
Simchi-Levi D, Xu Y (2022) Bypassing the monster: A faster and simpler optimal algorithm for contextual
bandits under realizability. Mathematics of Operations Research 47(3):1904вҖ“1931.
Sivakumar V, Zuo S, Banerjee A (2022) Smoothed adversarial linear contextual bandits with knapsacks.
International Conference on Machine Learning, 20253вҖ“20277 (PMLR).
Talluri KT, van Ryzin GJ (2004) The Theory and Practice of Revenue Management (New York: Springer).
Vera A, Banerjee S (2021) The bayesian prophet: A low-regret framework for online decision making. Man-
agement Science 67(3):1368вҖ“1391.
Vershynin R (2018) High-Dimensional Probability:
An Introduction with Applications in Data Science.
Cambridge Series in Statistical and Probabilistic Mathematics (Cambridge University Press), URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/9781108231596.
Wainwright MJ (2019) High-dimensional statistics: A non-asymptotic viewpoint, volume 48 (Cambridge
university press).
Wang Y, Wang H (2022) Constant regret resolving heuristics for price-based revenue management. Operations
Research 70(6):3538вҖ“3557.
Wang Y, Zheng Z, Shen ZJM (2024) Online pricing with polluted offline data. Available at SSRN 4320324 .
Wei A, Zhang F (2020) Optimal robustness-consistency trade-offs for learning-augmented online algorithms.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33:8042вҖ“8053.
Xu Y, Zeevi A (2020) Upper counterfactual confidence bounds: a new optimism principle for contextual
bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.07876 .
21
A
Extended Intuitions
A.1
Boundary Attracted Re-solve Method
Boundary attraction serves three purposes. First, it prevents noise-induced constraint violations
by creating a buffer zone near resource depletion. Second, it enables single-step regret analysis
without non-degeneracy conditions: by avoiding the near-zero instability region, we bound per-
period regret independently (Appendix D.1). Third, the safety margin absorbs both stochastic noise
(full-information setting) and parameter estimation errors (learning settings), providing uniform
robustness across all prediction quality regimes.
A.2
Variance Perturbation and Anchoring
OLS regression formulas.
Given historical data (p1, d1), . . . , (ptвҲ’1, dtвҲ’1), we define
Dt
j :=
tвҲ’1
X
s=1
[ds
j; ds
j В· ps]вҠӨ, вҲҖj вҲҲ[n],
P t :=
 t вҲ’1
PtвҲ’1
s=1(ps)вҠӨ
PtвҲ’1
s=1 ps
PtвҲ’1
s=1 ps(ps)вҠӨ

.
(9)
The OLS estimator is then
"
ЛҶОұt
j
ЛҶОІt
j
#
= (P t)вҖ Dt
j =
Оұj
ОІj

+ (P t)вҖ 
"
PtвҲ’1
s=1 Пөs
j
PtвҲ’1
s=1 Пөs
j В· ps
#
,
вҲҖj вҲҲ[n],
(10)
where (P t)вҖ  denotes the pseudo-inverse of P t. The estimation error scales inversely with the smallest
eigenvalue of P t. Following Keskin and Zeevi (2014), denoting pt = tвҲ’1 Pt
s=1 ps, one can show
that
О»min(P t) вүҘ
1
n(1 + 2U2)
nвҢҠt/nвҢӢ
X
s=1
(1 вҲ’1
s)
ps вҲ’psвҲ’1 вҲ’XвҢҲs/nвҢү2
2
(11)
for some fixed anchor Xk, k = 0, 1, . . . , such that ps вҲ’psвҲ’1 вҲ’Xk, s = kn + 1, . . . , kn + n form an
orthogonal basis of Rn. This bound shows that О»min(P t) grows with the accumulated variance of
historical pricesвҖ”exactly what the structured perturbations in Algorithm 2 maximize.
Perturbation design.
In line 12 of Algorithm 2, we add controlled exploration noise to the
price:
pt = ptвҲ’1 + (Лңpk вҲ’pkn) + Пғ0tвҲ’1/4etвҲ’kn
(12)
where etвҲ’kn вҲјN(0, In) is a standard Gaussian vector. This perturbation serves two purposes:
1. Exploration: prices all products with enough variation for accurate regression-based param-
eter estimation.
2. Variance control: the tвҲ’1/4 decay rate explores aggressively early (when estimation error
вҲҘЛҶBkn+1 вҲ’BвҲҘis large) and exploits later (when estimates tighten).
This forced exploration technique adapts standard contextual-bandit approaches (Abbasi-Yadkori
et al. 2011) to our periodic re-solving structure.
22
Anchoring regression with informed prices.
When an informed price-demand pair (p0, d0)
with known error bound Пө0 is available, we anchor the regression on this prior while adapting to
newly observed data. At time t, we solve the constrained least squares problem:
min
Оұ,B
tвҲ’1
X
s=1
вҲҘds вҲ’(Оұ + Bps)вҲҘ2
2
subject to
вҲҘd0 вҲ’(Оұ + Bp0)вҲҘ2
2 вүӨПө2
0.
(13)
This formulation is closely related to the unconstrained regression in Xu and Zeevi (2020) and
Simchi-Levi and Xu (2022), and extends to multiple informed prices by solving
min
Оұ,B
tвҲ’1
X
s=1
вҲҘds вҲ’(Оұ + Bps)вҲҘ2
2
subject to
вҲҘd0,i вҲ’(Оұ + Bp0,i)вҲҘ2
2 вүӨПө2
0,i,
вҲҖ(p0,i, d0,i).
Why not estimate Пө0 online
A natural question is whether Пө0 could be learned adaptively
during the selling horizon. In our setting, testing the informed price multiple times to estimate
Пө0 permanently depletes capacity, preventing future corrections.
Unlike unconstrained settings,
exploration here has permanent costs. As Proposition 7 suggests, this cost can make the informed-
price algorithm perform worse than algorithms that ignore the offline data entirely.
B
Conceptual Figures
This appendix collects the conceptual diagrams referenced in the main text.
C
Numerical Experiments: Configuration, Results, and Analysis
This appendix provides parameter specifications, robustness analysis, complete algorithm compar-
isons, and statistical validation for the experiments in Section 7.
C.1
Experimental Configuration
We test on two problem scales: Scale 1 (m = 10 resources, n = 20 products) and Scale 2 (m = 1,
n = 4).
For each scale, random instances are drawn as follows.
Consumption matrix entries
Aij are i.i.d. Uniform[0, 1]; demand intercepts Оұj вҲјUniform[5, 10]; and price-sensitivity entries
Bjk вҲјUniform[вҲ’1, 0].
To enforce Assumption 2, we shift B вҶҗB вҲ’О»max
  B+BвҠӨ
2

In, ensuring
negative definiteness. Initial capacity is set to c0 = AdвҲ—, where dвҲ—is the unconstrained optimal
demand, so that resource constraints bind at the fluid optimum. Observed demand at each period
is Лңdt = d(pt) + Оҫt with Оҫt вҲјN(0, Пғ2In).
Unless otherwise stated, all algorithms use boundary attraction threshold О¶ = 1, perturba-
tion scale Пғ0 = 1, and confidence level 1 вҲ’Оҙ with Оҙ = 0.05 (see Section 4 for confidence region
construction).
23
d1
d2
Capacity Ad = c/T
О¶/вҲҡП„
О¶/вҲҡП„
Fluid Opt (Safe)
Boundary Attraction
Forces tiny demand вҶ’0
в– Danger Zone
в– Safe Zone
вҖ” Constraint
Figure 5: Schematic of the boundary attraction mechanism in Algorithm 1. The red shaded regions
represent the danger zone where resource degeneracy causes instability: when a demand component
falls below threshold О¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2, dual variables can diverge. Fluid solutions in this region are
rounded to the boundary (zero demand), ensuring dual variables remain bounded and the re-solve
policy maintains stability.
C.2
Robustness Analysis
C.2.1
Robustness to Demand Noise
Figure 9 shows algorithm robustness across varying demand noise levels, testing each information
setting with noise standard deviation Пғ вҲҲ{0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 5} (keeping О¶ = 1 and Пө0 = 0.1 fixed,
using Scale 1: m = 10, n = 20, T = 500).
All three algorithms remain stable as noise increases by two orders of magnitude. From Пғ = 0.1
to Пғ = 5, regret increases only modestly, confirming that the algorithms degrade gracefully under
demand uncertainty rather than failing abruptly.
Robustness across noise levels: All three algorithms exhibit sublinear scaling with noise.
Comparing Пғ = 0.1 to Пғ = 5 (a 50-fold increase), full-information regret increases 6-fold (5 to 30),
no-information regret increases 4-fold (200 to 800), and informed-price regret increases 5-fold (10 to
50). This sublinear growth confirms effective noise tolerance. All algorithms maintain their relative
ranking across noise levels, so the performance ordering is robust to mis-specification of Пғ.
24
Time t
0
n
2n
3n
Epoch 0 (Burn-in)
Epoch 1
Epoch 2
Random Pricing
(Gather Initial Data)
Structured Perturbation
pt = Anchor + Noiset
Refined Perturbation
(Decaying Scale)
UP
UP
UP
Update Phase (UP):
1. OLS Est. (ЛҶОұ, ЛҶ
B)
2. Solve Fluid LP вҶ’
New Anchor
3. Reset Basis
Exploration Mechanism:
Perturbations Пғ0tвҲ’1/4 en-
sure
min eigenvalue О»min(P t) вҶ‘.
Figure 6: Timeline of Algorithm 2.
The horizon is divided into epochs of length n.
At each
update point (UP), parameters are re-estimated via ordinary least squares and the fluid plan is
re-optimized. Within epochs, structured perturbations Пғ0tвҲ’1/4etвҲ’kn ensure the design matrix has
eigenvalues growing at rate в„Ұ(
вҲҡ
t).
Input: Prior (p0, d0), Error Bound Пө0
Check Quality: (Пө0)2T вүӨП„
вҲҡ
T ?
Algorithm 3 (Trust)
В· Anchor OLS at (p0, d0) В· Exploit low bias Result: O(log T) Regret
Algorithm 2 (Fallback)
В· Discard inaccurate prior В· Explore from scratch Result: O(
вҲҡ
T) Regret
Unified Outcome Achieves optimal min{Bias, Variance} trade-off
YES (Small Пө0)
NO (Large Пө0)
Phase Transition Threshold: Пө0 вүҲT вҲ’1/4
Figure 7: Decision logic for Algorithm 3. The algorithm checks whether the initial error bound
Пө0 falls below the phase transition threshold вүҲT вҲ’1/4. When the prior is accurate (left branch),
the algorithm anchors estimation at (p0, d0) and achieves O(log T) regret; when inaccurate (right
branch), it reverts to full exploration and achieves O(
вҲҡ
T) regret.
C.2.2
Effect of Threshold Parameter О¶
Figure 10 shows how the threshold parameter О¶ (used in boundary attraction, Algorithm 1) impacts
performance across О¶ вҲҲ{0, 1, 2, 5, 10}, with Пғ = 1 and Пө0 = 0.1 fixed (using Scale 1: m = 10,
n = 20, T = 500).
The sharp regret increase from О¶ = 0 to О¶ = 1 (3вҖ“5Г— worse at О¶ = 0) reveals why bound-
ary attraction matters: without thresholding, the algorithm becomes trapped at degenerate solu-
tions where infinitesimal price changes produce negligible demand signal. Setting О¶ = 1 requires
Лңdj(pt) вүҘО¶Пғ before selling product j, forcing exploration at prices that produce meaningful signal
and breaking degeneracy. Beyond О¶ вүҲ1вҖ“2, gains diminish because over-thresholding reduces the
effective exploration signal. A moderate value О¶ вҲҲ[1, 2] balances these two forces.
Performance stabilizes across О¶ вҲҲ[0.5, 2], indicating robustness to moderate variations. Beyond
О¶ вүҘ5, over-filtering reduces the effective sample size and degrades performance. The optimal value
О¶ вүҲ1 emerges consistently across all three information regimes.
The effect is most pronounced for full-information and informed-price algorithms, which rely
heavily on solving the fluid LP. This confirms that boundary attraction addresses degeneracy in
25
Online Observation (dt)
Variance = Пғ2
Offline Surrogate (St)
Correlated, Biased
вҲ’
Г—О“
Control Variate
Pseudo-Observation ( Лңdt)
Var вүҲ(1 вҲ’ПҒ2)Пғ2
Mechanism: Subtracting
the predictable noise com-
ponent (О“St) isolates the
true signal.
Figure 8: Concept of Surrogate-Assisted Variance Reduction. Correlated offline surrogate
signals St act as control variates. By subtracting the predictable component of the noise (О“St) from
the raw online demand dt, we obtain a lower-variance pseudo-observation Лңdt for estimation.
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
T
0
10
20
30
40
50
Average Regret
Regret Comparison Across Noise Standard Error
noise_std = 0.1
noise_std = 0.5
noise_std = 1.0
noise_std = 2.0
noise_std = 5.0
(a) Full information
200
400
600
800
1000
T
300
400
500
600
700
800
Average Regret
Regret Comparison Across Noise Standard Error
noise_std = 0.1
noise_std = 0.5
noise_std = 1.0
noise_std = 2.0
noise_std = 5.0
(b) No information
200
400
600
800
1000
T
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Average Regret
Regret Comparison Across Noise Standard Error
noise_std = 0.1
noise_std = 0.5
noise_std = 1.0
noise_std = 2.0
noise_std = 5.0
(c) Informed price
Figure 9: Regret scales sublinearly with demand noise Пғ: a 50-fold increase in Пғ raises regret
only 4вҖ“6Г—, confirming graceful degradation across (a) full information, (b) no information, and (c)
informed price settings. Scale 1 (m = 10, n = 20), T = 500, О¶ = 1, Пө0 = 0.1.
LP-based pricing specifically, not a general exploration problem.
C.3
Algorithm Comparison Results
We report the complete results for the 5-algorithm comparison in Section 7.
C.3.1
Complete Numerical Results
Table 2 presents the complete regret results for all algorithms across all time horizons tested. Each
entry shows mean regret Вұ standard deviation based on 500 replications.
Bold entries indicate the best learning algorithm (excluding the Full-Info oracle) at each time
horizon T.
At T = 200, algorithms that exploit more prediction information achieve lower regret: Surro-
gate+Informed < Informed < Surrogate < Learning. This ordering persists across all time horizons,
consistent with the theoretical predictions.
26
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
T
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Average Regret
Regret Comparison Across Threshold 
 = 0
 = 1
 = 2
 = 5
 = 10
(a) Full information
200
400
600
800
1000
T
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Average Regret
Regret Comparison Across Threshold 
 = 0
 = 1
 = 2
 = 5
 = 10
(b) No information
200
400
600
800
1000
T
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Average Regret
Regret Comparison Across Threshold 
 = 0
 = 1
 = 2
 = 5
 = 10
(c) Informed price
Figure 10: Removing boundary attraction (О¶ = 0) increases regret 3вҖ“5Г—; moderate values О¶ вҲҲ[1, 2]
stabilize performance across (a) full information, (b) no information, and (c) informed price settings.
Scale 1 (m = 10, n = 20), T = 500, Пғ = 1, Пө0 = 0.1.
Table 2: Complete regret results across all time horizons. Mean Вұ standard deviation (500 repli-
cations).
T
Full-Info
Surr+Inf
Informed
Surrogate
Learning
200
вҲ’0.06 Вұ 81.8
103.99 Вұ 99.3
170.18 Вұ 99.3
388.40 Вұ 89.2
662.94 Вұ 442.3
400
вҲ’9.14 Вұ 123.6
57.99 Вұ 135.5
160.49 Вұ 125.9
508.68 Вұ 136.8
990.17 Вұ 841.6
600
2.19 Вұ 160.8
0.20 Вұ 167.5
160.09 Вұ 149.8
593.41 Вұ 186.3
1314.75 Вұ 1189.3
800
вҲ’6.47 Вұ 199.4
вҲ’60.51 Вұ 213.5
143.63 Вұ 201.9
660.50 Вұ 196.3
1554.92 Вұ 1524.4
1000
13.22 Вұ 207.5
вҲ’85.66 Вұ 275.0
125.18 Вұ 235.7
742.22 Вұ 410.2
1738.40 Вұ 1722.5
C.4
Additional Experimental Results
Figures 11 and 12 supplement the main text (Section 7) with results on the misspecificationвҖ“horizon
tradeoff and surrogate correlation, respectively.
D
Proofs for Boundary Attraction (Full Information)
This section formalizes the full-information setting: the firm knows the exact demand model f(p) =
Оұ + Bp. The main difficulty is controlling resource constraints under noisy demand realizations
while maintaining logarithmic regret.
The boundary attraction Mechanism.
Our analysis uses boundary attraction to con-
trol degeneracy in constrained optimization. When estimated demands dПҖ,t
i
fall below a dynamic
threshold О¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2, we round them to zero rather than risk infeasibility due to noise. This
buffer prevents the algorithm from hovering near degenerate regionsвҖ”states where some product
demands approach zero and the fluid optimization problem has multiple optimal solutions. Un-
like prior work (Wang and Wang 2022, Li and Ye 2022) requiring non-degeneracy assumptions
throughout (i.e., mini dвҲ—
i вүҘОҙ > 0 for some problem-dependent constant Оҙ), our mechanism pro-
duces boundary-attracted decisions that move small coordinates onto safe reduced-dimensional
faces. This eliminates the need for restrictive assumptions while paying only an O(О¶2 log T) cost
for conservative rounding, thereby preserving the logarithmic regret rate.
27
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
T
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Regret
Regret vs T for Different 
0 Values (Informed)
eps0=0
eps0=0.1
eps0=0.2
eps0=0.5
eps0=1
eps0=2
eps0=5
eps0=10
Figure 11: Phase transition in the informed-price setting: regret shifts from O(log T) to O(
вҲҡ
T) as
Пө0 crosses the threshold вүҲT вҲ’1/4.
D.1
Proof of Theorem 2
Proof Roadmap
We establish the O((n2О¶2 +Пғ2)вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2 log T) regret bound through the follow-
ing steps:
1. Hybrid Policy Construction: Define a sequence of hybrid policies {Hybridt}T+1
t=1 that in-
terpolate between the offline optimal solution and our online algorithm, enabling a telescoping
decomposition of regret.
2. Single-Step Difference Analysis: Decompose the total regret into a sum of single-step
differences RT (Hybridt, FT )вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT ) and analyze each term independently. Our
hybrid policy decomposition is inspired by the compensated coupling technique of Vera and
Banerjee (2021), but differs in two key aspects: (1) we handle continuous pricing decisions
rather than discrete accept/reject choices, where the most critical вҖңcorrect / incorrect de-
cisionвҖқ analysis in their setting no longer holds; (2) our boundary attraction mechanism
explicitly prevents degeneracy, whereas prior dynamic pricing papers assume non-degeneracy
throughout.
3. Case-by-Case Bounding via boundary attraction: For each time period, classify into
three cases based on the magnitude of estimated demands relative to the rounding threshold
О¶:
вҖў Case I: All demands large (no rounding) вҖ” control revenue loss via noise concentration
вҖў Case II: All demands small (full rounding) вҖ” show rounding cost is negligible
вҖў Case III: Mixed demands вҖ” combine techniques from Cases I and II
4. Concentration Inequalities: Apply sub-Gaussian tail bounds to control the probability
that noise causes constraint violations or large deviations from the fluid benchmark.
5. Summation and Final Bound: Sum the per-period bounds over all T periods, showing
that the logarithmic term is driven by conservative rounding and intrinsic stochasticity.
28
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Surrogate Correlation 
13000
14000
15000
16000
17000
Average Regret
Regret Reduction with Surrogate Assistance (m=10, n=20, T=500)
Baseline (No Surrogate)
Surrogate-Assisted
Figure 12: Surrogate variance reduction tracks the theoretical prediction (1 вҲ’ПҒ2): at ПҒ = 0.9,
observed regret drops 21% versus 19% predicted.
Contrast with prior work. Traditional approaches (Wang and Wang 2022, Li and Ye 2022)
require mini dвҲ—
i вүҘОҙ > 0 to hold globally throughout the horizonвҖ”a restrictive assumption that fails
when resources approach depletion or multiple products compete for the same capacity. boundary
attraction adjusts dynamically: when the fluid optimal solution suggests small demands (below
threshold О¶(T вҲ’t+1)вҲ’1/2), we round them to zero, paying only O(О¶2/(T вҲ’t)) per period. Summing
over all periods yields O(О¶2 log T) total cost. The threshold О¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2 balances two forces:
larger О¶ increases the safety buffer (reducing constraint violations) but increases rounding cost;
smaller О¶ allows more aggressive pricing but risks infeasibility. Setting О¶ = Оҳ(ПғвҲҡlog n) achieves
the optimal trade-off, eliminating the problem-dependent constant Оҙ from the regret bound.
D.1.1
Step 1: Problem Setup and Hybrid Policy Construction
Problem Formulation.
At each time t, the algorithm solves the following re-solve constrained
programming problem:
max
pвҲҲP
r = pвҠӨd
s.t.
d = Оұ + Bp,
Ad вүӨ
ct
T вҲ’t + 1,
(14)
where ct is the inventory level at the beginning of time t, and (pПҖ,t, dПҖ,t) denotes the optimal
solution.
Notation.
To streamline the exposition, we introduce the following notation:
вҖў p(d) := BвҲ’1(d вҲ’Оұ): inverse demand function mapping demand to price
вҖў r(d) := p(d)вҠӨd: revenue as a function of demand (without noise)
вҖў r(d, Пө) := r(d) + p(d)вҠӨПө: revenue when actual demand is d + Пө
вҖў RT (ПҖвҖІ, FT ): total revenue under policy ПҖвҖІ given realized sample path FT
вҖў ПҖ: our online policy (Algorithm 1)
29
Hybrid Policy Construction.
Direct comparison between the online policy ПҖ and the offline
optimal is infeasible: the offline optimal assumes perfect foresight of all future noise realizations
{Пө1, . . . , ПөT }, while the online policy decides sequentially from past observations alone. We bridge
this information gap by constructing hybrid policies {Hybridt}T+1
t=1 that gradually transition from
the offline optimal (Hybrid1, which knows all noise) to the online policy (HybridT+1 = ПҖ, which
knows no future noise). Each hybrid policy Hybridt follows the online policy up to time t вҲ’1,
experiencing noise {Пө1, . . . , ПөtвҲ’1}, then assumes no noise for the remaining periods [t, T]. Each
step therefore adds exactly one period of uncertainty. The regret decomposes as RegretT  ПҖ

=
PT
t=1[Revenue(Hybridt) вҲ’Revenue(Hybridt+1)], where each term captures the marginal cost of
uncertainty in period t, reducing the problem to T independent single-period analyses.
Definition 10. For 1 вүӨt вүӨT + 1, we define Hybridt as the policy that applies online policy ПҖ in
time 1, . . . , t вҲ’1 and dПҖ,t, while for the periods [t + 1, T], there are no noises of demand. Moreover,
define Hybrid1 as the fluid optimal policy given in (1) without noises and HybridT+1 = ПҖ as the
online policy ПҖ throughout the process.
The revenue under hybrid policy Hybridt is:
RT (Hybridt, FT ) =
tвҲ’1
X
s=1
r(dПҖ,s, Пөs) + (T вҲ’t + 1)r(dПҖ,t).
By the optimality of the fluid benchmark, E

RT (Hybridt, FT )

вүҘE

RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

holds
for 0 вүӨt вүӨT вҲ’1. This monotonicity property enables the telescoping decomposition:
RegretT  ПҖ

= E
" T
X
t=1
RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )
#
=
T
X
t=1
E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

.
(15)
Bounding Single-Step Differences.
The remainder of the proof focuses on bounding each
single-step difference E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

for 0 вүӨt вүӨT вҲ’1. We will
show that this difference can be decomposed into terms that depend on the noise realization Пөt and
the solution quality dПҖ,t.
Since the realized demand at time t is dt = dПҖ,t + Пөt, we can expand the revenue function
r(d) = dвҠӨBвҲ’1(dвҲ’Оұ) using its quadratic structure (note: BвҲ’1 need not be symmetric; the quadratic
form hвҠӨBвҲ’1h вүЎ1
2hвҠӨ(BвҲ’1 + BвҲ’вҠӨ)h is controlled by the symmetric part):
r(dПҖ,t, Пөt) = r(dПҖ,t) + (Пөt)вҠӨpПҖ,t,
r(dвҖІ) = r(d) +

((BвҲ’1 + BвҲ’вҠӨ)d вҲ’BвҲ’вҠӨОұ)
вҠӨ
(dвҖІ вҲ’d) + (dвҖІ вҲ’d)вҠӨBвҲ’1(dвҖІ вҲ’d),
вҲҖd, dвҖІ вҲҲRn
+.
(16)
The single-step difference can then be rewritten as:
RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT ) = (T вҲ’t + 1)r(dПҖ,t) вҲ’r(dПҖ,t, Пөt) вҲ’(T вҲ’t)r(dПҖ,t+1)
(17)
30
D.1.2
Step 2: Three-Case Analysis via boundary attraction
Classification Strategy.
We partition time periods based on demand magnitude relative to
the rounding threshold О¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2. Each case requires a different proof technique because
boundary attraction operates differently in each regime:
вҖў Case I (large demands): Use concentration inequalities to show noise absorption via the
safety buffer. The key challenge is bounding the probability that stochastic demand exceeds
capacity despite the buffer.
вҖў Case II (small demands): Show that rounding cost is negligible because the fluid optimal
already suggests вҖңdonвҖҷt bother with these products.вҖқ The revenue loss is O(О¶2/(T вҲ’t)) per
period.
вҖў Case III (mixed demands): Combine techniques from Cases I and II. For products with large
demands (set I), apply Case I concentration bounds; for small demands (set I), apply Case
II rounding bounds. The coupling between these two groups through capacity constraints is
handled via careful construction of the hypothetical next-period solution.
The threshold О¶(T вҲ’t+1)вҲ’1/2 plays a dual role: it provides a safety buffer against noise (larger О¶ вҮ’
fewer constraint violations) while controlling the rounding cost (larger О¶ вҮ’more products rounded
to zero). Our analysis shows these two effects balance at О¶ = Оҳ(ПғвҲҡlog n), yielding logarithmic
regret.
Case Classification.
Formally, we classify each period t into three cases based on the magnitude
of the optimal demands dПҖ,t relative to the rounding threshold О¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2:
вҖў Case (I): mini dПҖ,t
i
вүҘО¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2 вҖ” all demands are large (no rounding occurs)
вҖў Case (II): maxi dПҖ,t вүӨО¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2 вҖ” all demands are small (full rounding to zero)
вҖў Case (III): mini dПҖ,t
i
вүӨО¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2 вүӨmaxi dПҖ,t
i
вҖ” mixed demands (partial rounding)
Cases I and II represent extreme scenarios amenable to clean analysis, while Case III combines
techniques from both.
Case (I): All Demands Large (mini dПҖ,t
i
> О¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2).
In this case, no rounding occurs,
and the algorithm sets prices based on the true demand solution dПҖ,t. The main task is controlling
the revenue loss due to demand noise Пөt; when all demands are sufficiently large, noise-induced
constraint violations occur with exponentially small probability.
We decompose the single-step
difference by conditioning on whether constraints remain satisfied. Define Et
i as the event that
product iвҖҷs demand can absorb its noise: dПҖ,t
i
вүҘ
Пөt
i
TвҲ’t for all i вҲҲ[n], and let Et = вҲ©n
i=1Et
i be the event
that all products satisfy this condition. Then (17) can be decomposed as:
E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )
FtвҲ’1
= P(Et)E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )
Et, Ft
+ P((Et)c)E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )
(Et)c, FtвҲ’1
.
(18)
31
Noise Absorption via Buffer.
We bound each term separately. Conditioning on Et (constraints
satisfied):
E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )
Et, FtвҲ’1
= E

(T вҲ’t + 1)r(dПҖ,t) вҲ’r(dПҖ,t, Пөt) вҲ’(T вҲ’t)r(dПҖ,t+1)
Et, FtвҲ’1
вүӨE

(T вҲ’t + 1)r(dПҖ,t) вҲ’r(dПҖ,t, Пөt) вҲ’(T вҲ’t)r(dПҖ,t вҲ’
Пөt
T вҲ’t)
Et, FtвҲ’1

(a)
= E

вҲ’(Пөt)вҠӨpПҖ,t + вҲҮr(dПҖ,t)вҠӨПөt вҲ’
1
T вҲ’t(Пөt)вҠӨBвҲ’1ПөtEt, FtвҲ’1

(b)
= E

(gПҖ,t)вҠӨПөt вҲ’
1
T вҲ’t(Пөt)вҠӨBвҲ’1Пөt|Et, FtвҲ’1

,
(19)
where (a) uses the Taylor expansion from (16), (b) defines
gПҖ,t := вҲҮr(dПҖ,t) вҲ’pПҖ,t = BвҲ’вҠӨdПҖ,t + (BвҲ’1 вҲ’BвҲ’вҠӨ)Оұ,
and we use the price-demand relationship pПҖ,t = BвҲ’1(dПҖ,t вҲ’Оұ).
We now bound the linear term (gПҖ,t)вҠӨПөt by separating contributions from the two events:
P(Et)E
h
(gПҖ,t)вҠӨПөt|Et, FtвҲ’1i
= E
h
(gПҖ,t)вҠӨПөti
вҲ’P((Et)c)E
h
(gПҖ,t)вҠӨПөt|(Et)c, FtвҲ’1i
= вҲ’E
h
(gПҖ,t)вҠӨПөt1{(Et)c}|FtвҲ’1i
(a)
вүӨ
gПҖ,t
2 P((Et)c|FtвҲ’1)1/2E
hПөt2
2
i1/2
вүӨ
BвҲ’1
2 (dmax + 2 вҲҘОұвҲҘ2)P((Et)c|FtвҲ’1)1/2E
hПөt2
2
i1/2
,
(20)
where (a) applies Cauchy-Schwarz together with
gПҖ,t
2 вүӨ
BвҲ’1
2 (dmax +2 вҲҘОұвҲҘ2). The quadratic
noise term satisfies:
P(Et)E

вҲ’(Пөt)вҠӨBвҲ’1Пөt
T вҲ’t
Et, FtвҲ’1

вүӨ
BвҲ’1
2
T вҲ’t E
hПөt2
2
i
.
(21)
For the second term in (18) (constraints violated), we bound the revenue loss using the maximum
possible revenue and Cauchy-Schwarz:
P((Et)c)E

f(HybridtвҲ’1) вҲ’f(Hybridt)
(Et)c
вүӨP((Et)c)E
h
(T вҲ’t)r(dПҖ,t) вҲ’(Пөt)вҠӨpПҖ,t|(Et)ci
вүӨP((Et)c)

(T вҲ’t)rmax вҲ’E
h
(Пөt)вҠӨpПҖ,t|(Et)ci
вүӨ(T вҲ’t)rmaxP((Et)c) + вҲҡnUE
hПөt2
2
i1/2
P((Et)c)1/2,
(22)
where the last inequality uses Cauchy-Schwarz and the bound вҲҘpПҖ,tвҲҘвҲһвүӨU.
Combining equations (18)вҖ“(22) yields:
E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

вүӨПғ(
BвҲ’1
2 (dmax + 2 вҲҘОұвҲҘ2) + вҲҡnU)P((Et)c)1/2 + (T вҲ’t)rmaxP((E
(23)
32
Exponential Decay via boundary attraction.
It remains to bound P((Et)c). boundary at-
traction ensures mini dПҖ,t
i
вүҘО¶(T вҲ’t+1)вҲ’1/2 in Case I, creating a buffer that absorbs noise. Because
the buffer size О¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2 grows as the horizon shrinks (fewer remaining periods require a
smaller buffer), it balances robustness against revenue loss. The following concentration inequality
for sub-Gaussian random variables shows that constraint violations decay exponentially.
Lemma 11 (Wainwright 2019). Let X1, . . . , Xn be Пғ2-sub-Gaussian random variables with zero
mean, then for each О» > 0, it holds that
P

max
1вүӨiвүӨn Xi вүҘО»

вүӨn exp(вҲ’О»2/2Пғ2)
Applying Lemma 11 to the noise components Пөt
i/(T вҲ’t), we obtain:
P((Et)c) = P

вҲғi вҲҲ[n], s.t.dПҖ,t
i
<
Пөt
i
T вҲ’t

вүӨP

max
i
Пөt
i
T вҲ’t >
О¶
(T вҲ’t + 1)1/2

(a)
вүӨn exp

вҲ’
О¶2(T вҲ’t)2
2Пғ2(T вҲ’t + 1)

(b)
вүӨn exp(вҲ’2(T вҲ’t) log n) = nвҲ’2(TвҲ’t)+1,
(24)
where (a) applies Lemma 11 with О» = О¶(T вҲ’t)/(T вҲ’t + 1)1/2, and (b) uses (T вҲ’t)2/(T вҲ’t + 1) вүҘ
(T вҲ’t)/2 together with the parameter choice О¶ вүҘ2ПғвҲҡ4 log n. Maintaining a minimum demand
level via boundary attraction thus renders constraint violations exponentially rare.
Substituting (24) into (23) yields:
E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

вүӨПғ(
BвҲ’1
2 (dmax + 2 вҲҘОұвҲҘ2) + вҲҡnU) exp(вҲ’(T вҲ’t)) + rmax(T вҲ’t) e
(25)
The first two terms decay exponentially in T вҲ’t and thus contribute only O(1) to total regret. The
third term contributes O(log T) when summed over all periods.
Case (II): All Demands Small (maxi dПҖ,t
i
вүӨО¶(T вҲ’t+1)вҲ’1/2).
In this case, boundary attraction
rounds all demands to zero: the algorithm sets ЛңdПҖ,t = 0, since the fluid optimal solution suggests
demands too small to justify pursuing given the noise level.
Intuition for Case II.
When all optimal demands are below О¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2, the fluid solution
already indicates near-zero profitability for these products. Rounding them to zero costs at most
the revenue from these small demands. Since each demand is bounded by О¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2 across n
products, the revenue loss per period is O(nО¶2/(TвҲ’t)). Summing over all periods: PT
t=1 O(nО¶2/(TвҲ’
t)) = O(nО¶2 log T).
Each rounding has diminishing cost as the horizon shrinks, and the total
rounding cost remains negligible relative to the benefit of avoiding constraint violations.
Since all optimal demands are below the threshold, we have вҲҘdПҖ,tвҲҘвҲһвүӨО¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2. The
33
single-step difference can be bounded as:
E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

вүӨE

(T вҲ’t + 1)r(dПҖ,t) вҲ’(T вҲ’t)r
T вҲ’t + 1
T вҲ’t
dПҖ,t

= E

(T вҲ’t + 1)(dПҖ,t)вҠӨBвҲ’1(dПҖ,t вҲ’Оұ) вҲ’(T вҲ’t)T вҲ’t + 1
T вҲ’t
(dПҖ,t)вҠӨBвҲ’1(T вҲ’t + 1
T вҲ’t
dПҖ,t вҲ’Оұ)

= E

вҲ’T вҲ’t + 1
T вҲ’t
(dПҖ,t)вҠӨBвҲ’1dПҖ,t

вүӨn2О¶2 BвҲ’1
2
T вҲ’t + 1
,
(26)
where the last inequality uses вҲҘdПҖ,tвҲҘ2
2 вүӨnвҲҘdПҖ,tвҲҘ2
вҲһвүӨnО¶2(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1. This bound shows that the
revenue loss from rounding all small demands to zero scales as O(О¶2/(T вҲ’t)), which contributes
O(О¶2 log T) to total regret.
Case (III): Mixed Demands (mini dПҖ,t
i
< О¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2 < maxi dПҖ,t
i ).
This case handles
periods where some products have large demands (above the threshold) while others have small
demands (below the threshold). boundary attraction rounds only the small demands to zero, while
treating large demands as in Case I.
Case III Strategy: Combining Techniques.
We combine techniques from Cases I and II.
The two product groups interact through the capacity constraint Adt вүӨct, so we must decouple
their contributions. For products with large demands (set I = {i : dПҖ,t
i
> О¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2}), Case
I concentration bounds yield exponentially small violation probability. For products with small
demands (set I = [n] \ I), Case II rounding bounds give revenue loss O(О¶2/(T вҲ’t)). To decouple
the two groups, we construct a hypothetical next-period solution Лңdt: for i вҲҲI, it absorbs noise via
Лңdt
i = dПҖ,t
i
вҲ’Пөt
i/(T вҲ’t); for i вҲҲI, it scales the small demands as in Case II.
Let I = {i вҲҲ[n] : dПҖ,t
i
> О¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2} denote the set of products with large demands, and
I = [n]\I the complement. Define EI = вҲ©iвҲҲIEi as the event that all large-demand products can
absorb their noise. We construct a hypothetical next-period solution Лңdt that keeps large demands
at dПҖ,t
i
вҲ’Пөt/(T вҲ’t) for i вҲҲI, and scales small demands to (T вҲ’t + 1)dПҖ,t
i /(T вҲ’t) for i вҲҲI. The
single-step difference decomposes as:
E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

вүӨE
h
(T вҲ’t + 1)r(dПҖ,t) вҲ’r(dt, Пөt) вҲ’(T вҲ’t)r( Лңdt)
i
вүӨE
h
вҲ’(pt)вҠӨПөt вҲ’вҲҮr(dПҖ,t)вҠӨ(dt вҲ’dПҖ,t) вҲ’(dt вҲ’dПҖ,t)вҠӨBвҲ’1(dt вҲ’dПҖ,t)
i
вҲ’(T вҲ’t)E
h
вҲҮr(dПҖ,t)вҠӨ( Лңdt вҲ’dПҖ,t) + ( Лңdt вҲ’dПҖ,t)вҠӨBвҲ’1( Лңdt вҲ’dПҖ,t)
i
.
(27)
We analyze each term separately. For products in I (small demands), boundary attraction sets
dt
i = 0, while for products in I (large demands), we have dt
i = dПҖ,t
i . Since dПҖ,t
i
вүӨО¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2
for all i вҲҲI, the quadratic term from rounding small demands satisfies:
(dt вҲ’dПҖ,t)вҠӨBвҲ’1(dt вҲ’dПҖ,t) вүӨО¶2(n вҲ’|I|)
BвҲ’1
2 (T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1.
(28)
34
On the other hand, we have
( Лңdt вҲ’dПҖ,t)вҠӨBвҲ’1( Лңdt вҲ’dПҖ,t)
вүӨ2
BвҲ’1
2
(T вҲ’t)2
dПҖ,t
I

2
2 +
Пөt
I
2
2

.
(29)
Moreover, for the first-order terms, we have
вҲҮr(dПҖ,t)вҠӨ(dt вҲ’dПҖ,t) = вҲ’вҲҮr(dПҖ,t)вҠӨdПҖ,t
I ,
(30)
and
вҲҮr(dПҖ,t)вҠӨ( Лңdt вҲ’dПҖ,t) =
1
T вҲ’tвҲҮr(dПҖ,t)вҠӨdПҖ,t
I
вҲ’
1
T вҲ’tвҲҮr(dПҖ,t)вҠӨПөt
I.
(31)
The deterministic first-order terms in (30) and (31) cancel after multiplying (31) by (T вҲ’t), leaving
only the noise contribution вҲҮr(dПҖ,t)вҠӨПөt
I. Combining equations (28)вҖ“(31) with (27), and following
an analysis analogous to Case I (conditioning on whether large-demand products satisfy their
constraints and using the same bound on
gПҖ,t
2), we obtain:
E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

вүӨПғ(
BвҲ’1
2 (dmax + 2 вҲҘОұвҲҘ2) + вҲҡnU) exp(вҲ’(T вҲ’t)) + rmax(T вҲ’t) exp(вҲ’2(T вҲ’t)) + Пғ2 BвҲ’1
2
T вҲ’t
+ n2О¶2 BвҲ’1
2
T вҲ’t + 1
.
(32)
The bound has the same structure as Cases I and II: exponentially decaying terms from concentra-
tion inequalities on large demands, plus a O(О¶2/(T вҲ’t)) term from rounding small demands.
D.1.3
Step 3: Final Regret Bound
Combining the bounds from all three cases (25), (26), and (32), we obtain a uniform bound valid
for all periods:
E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

вүӨn2О¶2 BвҲ’1
2
T вҲ’t + 1
+ C0 exp(вҲ’(T вҲ’t)) + Пғ2 BвҲ’1
2
T вҲ’t
,
where C0 = CвҖІПғ(
BвҲ’1
2 (dmax + 2 вҲҘОұвҲҘ2) + вҲҡnU) + rmax for an absolute constant CвҖІ.
Summing over all T periods using the telescoping decomposition (15):
RegretT  ПҖ

=
T
X
t=1
E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

вүӨ
T
X
t=1
 
n2О¶2 BвҲ’1
2
T вҲ’t + 1
+ C0 exp(вҲ’(T вҲ’t)) + Пғ2 BвҲ’1
2
T вҲ’t
!
= n2О¶2 BвҲ’1
2
T
X
s=1
1
s + C0
TвҲ’1
X
s=0
exp(вҲ’s) + Пғ2 BвҲ’1
2
TвҲ’1
X
s=1
1
s
= O
 n2О¶2 BвҲ’1
2 log T + C0 + Пғ2 BвҲ’1
2 log T

= O
 (n2О¶2 + Пғ2)
BвҲ’1
2 log T

,
where we used the harmonic sum bound PT
s=1 1/s = O(log T) and the geometric series bound
PвҲһ
s=0 exp(вҲ’s) = O(1).
35
Interpretation of the Final Bound.
The O(log T) rate originates from the harmonic sum
PT
t=1 1/(T вҲ’t) = PT
s=1 1/s вҲјlog T in Case IIвҖҷs rounding costвҖ”the dominant contribution. Case
I contributes only O(1) total regret because the exponential tail bounds exp(вҲ’(T вҲ’t)) sum to
a geometric series (boundary attraction renders constraint violations exponentially rare by main-
taining a minimum demand buffer of О¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2). The two components of the final bound
have distinct interpretations: n2О¶2 reflects the cost of conservative rounding (larger О¶ rounds more
products to zero), while Пғ2 reflects the intrinsic cost of stochastic demand (unavoidable even with
perfect model knowledge). The logarithmic rate is optimal for the full-information constrained
pricing setting and cannot be improved without additional structural assumptions. This completes
the proof of Theorem 2.
E
Proofs for Online Learning Without Prior Information
This section analyzes the no-guidance baseline, where the firm must learn the unknown demand
model f(p) = Оұ + Bp from observed data while simultaneously making pricing decisions. The
core challenge is balancing exploration (gathering informative data to estimate parameters) with
exploitation (using current estimates to maximize revenue).
The algorithm addresses this by
periodically re-estimating demand parameters and deliberately perturbing prices to ensure sufficient
data variance for accurate learning.
E.1
Proof of Theorem 2
Proof Roadmap
Core Logic: Why O(
вҲҡ
T) Regret? Simultaneous learning and pricing fun-
damentally limits achievable regret. The square-root rate arises from the exploration-exploitation
trade-off: (1) Parameter error decays slowly: With deliberate price perturbations ensuring Fisher
information Jk вүі
вҲҡ
k, least-squares regression yields estimation error вҲҘЛҶBk вҲ’BвҲҘ2 = O(1/
вҲҡ
k) per
epoch k. (2) Errors accumulate over epochs: Summing over T вҖІ = T/n epochs, PT вҖІ
k=1 O(1/
вҲҡ
k) вҲј
O(
вҲҡ
T вҖІ) вҲјO(
вҲҡ
T). This square-root barrier is fundamentalвҖ”it matches the information-theoretic
lower bound (Keskin and Zeevi 2014) even for the unconstrained pricing problem, so no algorithm
can achieve better than в„Ұ(
вҲҡ
T) worst-case regret without prior knowledge of demand parameters.
The contribution here is achieving this optimal rate despite resource constraints and degeneracy.
Proof Steps. We establish the O

(О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)
вҲҡ
T

regret bound through the following steps:
1. Periodic Hybrid Policy Construction: Extend the hybrid policy framework to accom-
modate periodic re-solve updates every n periods, where parameters ЛҶОұkn+1, ЛҶBkn+1 are re-
estimated via linear regression.
2. Error Decomposition: Decompose the demand estimation error вҲҶt = dt вҲ’dПҖ,t into three
components:
вҖў вҲҶt
I: Parameter estimation error (from regression on historical data)
вҖў вҲҶt
II: Mean price drift (from averaging over periods)
вҖў вҲҶt
III: Exploration perturbation (deliberate noise for sufficient data variance)
3. Parameter Estimation Analysis: Bound вҲҘвҲҶt
IвҲҘ2 using:
вҖў Fisher information lower bounds on data variance (Lemma from Keskin and Zeevi (2014))
вҖў Lipschitz continuity of constrained optimization solutions (Lemma 13)
36
вҖў Second-order growth conditions (Lemma 14)
Establish E[вҲҘвҲҶt
IвҲҘ2
2] = O(n5/
вҲҡ
k) where k = вҢҠt/nвҢӢ.
4. Single-Period Regret Bounds:
For each period k вҲҲ[T вҖІ], analyze the n-step regret
RT (Hybridkn+1, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybrid(k+1)n+1, FT ) through the same three-case framework as
in Appendix D.1, but with:
вҖў Modified rounding thresholds: О¶[(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/4 + tвҲ’1/4] (vs. (T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2 in full info)
вҖў Additional terms from estimation errors вҲҶt
I, вҲҶt
II, вҲҶt
III
5. Aggregation Over Periods: Sum bounds over all T вҖІ = T/n re-solve epochs. The key terms
are:
вҖў Estimation error: PT вҖІ
k=1 O(1/
вҲҡ
k) = O(
вҲҡ
T)
вҖў Noise accumulation: O(
вҲҡ
T) from concentration inequalities
вҖў Exploration cost: O(Пғ0
вҲҡ
T) from perturbations
Connection to Prior Work: The parameter estimation technique draws on the regression frame-
work of Keskin and Zeevi (2014), Xu and Zeevi (2020), Simchi-Levi and Xu (2022), but here it
is embedded in the constrained pricing problem through boundary attraction (preventing infeasi-
bility), periodic re-optimization (balancing exploration and exploitation), and careful perturbation
design (ensuring sufficient data variance for accurate estimation).
The detailed proof follows below.
E.1.1
Step 1: Problem Setup and Periodic Hybrid Policies
Overview.
Relative to the full-information setting, the firm must now estimate demand param-
eters (Оұ, B) from historical price-demand observations. We reuse the hybrid-policy decomposition
from Appendix D and adapt it to periodic parameter updates every n periods: the time horizon
divides into epochs of length n, and within each epoch a fixed parameter estimate drives pricing
decisions.
Problem Formulation.
At each re-solve period t = kn+1 for k = 0, 1, . . . , T/nвҲ’1, the algorithm
updates parameter estimates ( ЛҶОұt, ЛҶBt) via linear regression and solves:
max
pвҲҲP
r = pвҠӨd
s.t.
d = Оұ + Bp,
Ad вүӨ
ct
T вҲ’t + 1,
(33)
where ct is the inventory level, and we use estimated parameters ( ЛҶОұkn+1, ЛҶBkn+1) obtained from
linear regression (10) on historical data.
37
Epoch-Level Regret Decomposition.
Without loss of generality, assume T = T вҖІn for some
integer T вҖІ (the horizon divides evenly into epochs of length n). Because the algorithm updates
parameters only at the start of each epoch, the hybrid policy decomposition operates at the epoch
level rather than the period level:
RegretT  ПҖ

= E
" T вҖІ
X
k=1
RT (Hybridkn+1, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybrid(k+1)n+1, FT )
#
=
T вҖІ
X
k=1
E
h
RT (Hybridkn+1, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybrid(k+1)n+1, FT )
i
.
(34)
For brevity, superscripts k, k + 1 abbreviate kn + 1, (k + 1)n + 1 when context is clear. The goal is
to bound each epoch-level difference E

RT (Hybridk, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridk+1, FT )

for k вҲҲ[T вҖІ].
E.1.2
Step 2: Three-Component Error Decomposition
Defining the Error.
For period t in epoch k = вҢҠ(t вҲ’1)/nвҢӢ, let pt and dt := f(pt) denote the
actual prices and demands under Algorithm 2. Define вҲҶt = dt вҲ’dПҖ,k as the deviation from the
fluid optimal demand (obtained by solving (2) with true parameters and inventory level ckn+1).
Three Sources of Error.
The total error decomposes into three components, each reflecting a
distinct challenge in the no-information setting:
вҲҶt = ( Лңdk вҲ’dПҖ,kn+1)
|
{z
}
:=вҲҶt
I
+ (d
tвҲ’1 вҲ’d
kn)
|
{z
}
:=вҲҶt
II
+ Пғ0tвҲ’1/4BetвҲ’kn
|
{z
}
:=вҲҶt
III
.
(35)
вҖў вҲҶt
I: learning cost вҖ” Using estimated parameters ( ЛҶОұk, ЛҶBk) instead of the true (Оұ, B) causes
the algorithm to solve a misspecified optimization problem. This error decays as O(1/
вҲҡ
k)
per epoch as regression improves, contributing O(
вҲҡ
T) to total regret.
вҖў вҲҶt
II: Drift cost вҖ” Averaging prices ptвҲ’1 within an epoch causes the algorithm to lag
behind evolving inventory constraints. This error scales as O(n/t) (smaller for later periods),
contributing O(
вҲҡ
T) when summed.
вҖў вҲҶt
III: Exploration cost вҖ” Deliberate perturbations Пғ0tвҲ’1/4etвҲ’kn ensure sufficient price
variance for accurate regression (Fisher information Jk вүі
вҲҡ
k). The decay rate tвҲ’1/4 bal-
ances exploration (large perturbations early) against exploitation (small perturbations later),
contributing O(Пғ0
вҲҡ
T) to total regret.
Each component is bounded independently, then combined via the triangle inequality.
Bounding Mean Price Drift (вҲҶt
II).
Using the triangle inequality and the fact that demands
are bounded by dmax:
вҲҶt
II

2 =
d
tвҲ’1 вҲ’d
kn
2
вүӨt вҲ’1 вҲ’kn
(t вҲ’1)
d
kn
2 +
1
t вҲ’1

tвҲ’1
X
s=kn+1
ds

2
38
вүӨ
n
t вҲ’1dmax +
n
t вҲ’1dmax
=
2n
t вҲ’1dmax.
(36)
The perturbation term вҲҶt
III is bounded directly from its definition:
вҲҶt
III

2 вүӨПғ0 вҲҘBвҲҘ2 tвҲ’1/4.
(37)
E.1.3
Step 3: From Data Variance to Parameter Accuracy вҖ” Bounding вҲҶt
I
Motivation for Fisher Information.
Accurate estimation of the demand matrix B via re-
gression ЛҶB = (P t)вҖ Dt requires price variation. If prices cluster too tightly (e.g., always near the
unconstrained optimum), the design matrix P t becomes ill-conditioned: О»min(P t) remains small and
estimation error вҲҘЛҶB вҲ’BвҲҘ2 stagnates. Fisher information Jk quantifies the accumulated variance of
historical prices relative to their mean, serving as a proxy for О»min(P t). The deliberate perturbations
Пғ0tвҲ’1/4etвҲ’kn ensure orthogonal price vectors within each epoch, guaranteeing Jk вүі
вҲҡ
k. Larger Jk
yields more informative data for regression, enabling parameter error to decay as O(1/
вҲҡ
k). The
decay rate tвҲ’1/4 is chosen to be large enough for Fisher information to grow (faster than tвҲ’1/2,
which would be insufficient) yet small enough to avoid excessive revenue loss (slower than constant
perturbations).
Fisher Information and Data Variance.
Bounding вҲҶt
I requires that historical data contain
sufficient information for accurate parameter estimation.
The relevant quantity is the Fisher
information accumulated from price perturbations. Define:
Jk := nвҲ’1
nk
X
s=1
(1 вҲ’sвҲ’1)
ps вҲ’psвҲ’1 вҲ’(Лңpk вҲ’pkn)

2
2
= nвҲ’1
k
X
l=1
n
X
i=1

1 вҲ’
1
n(l вҲ’1) + i

Пғ2
0(kn + i)вҲ’1/2
вүҘПғ2
0
вҲҡ
kn
8n
,
вҲҖt = 1, 2, . . . .
(38)
The following lemma provides exponential concentration for the parameter estimation error вҲҘЛҶBkn+1вҲ’
BвҲҘ2, conditional on sufficient data variance Jk. The decay rate depends on both the error mag-
nitude О» and the accumulated information Jk: with enough exploration (large Jk), parameter
estimates become accurate with high probability.
Lemma 12 (Keskin and Zeevi 2014). Under our choice of pt, there exists constant C1, Пғ1 such that
P
 ЛҶОұkn+1 вҲ’Оұ

2 +
 ЛҶBkn+1 вҲ’B

2 > О», Jk вүҘО»вҖІ
вүӨC1(kn)n2+nвҲ’1 exp(вҲ’Пғ1(О» вҲ§О»2)О»вҖІ), вҲҖО», О»вҖІ > 0.
Interpretation of Lemma 12.
When sufficient data variance has accumulated (Jk вүҘО»вҖІ), the
parameter error вҲҘЛҶBkn+1 вҲ’BвҲҘ2 decays exponentially in both the error threshold О» and the Fisher
information О»вҖІ, at rate exp(вҲ’Пғ1(О» вҲ§О»2)О»вҖІ).
The polynomial pre-factor (kn)n2+nвҲ’1 grows with
sample size but is benignвҖ”the exponential decay dominates for large k. Fisher information Jk
thus directly controls parameter accuracy: doubling Jk exponentially reduces the probability of
large estimation errors. The perturbation strategy ensures Jk вүі
вҲҡ
kn/(8n) (from (38)), yielding
39
exponential concentration in
вҲҡ
k, which translates to E[вҲҘЛҶB вҲ’BвҲҘ2] = O(1/
вҲҡ
k) after integrating the
tail bound.
Combining (38) and Lemma 12 yields:
P(
 ЛҶОұkn+1 вҲ’Оұ

2 +
 ЛҶBkn+1 вҲ’B

2 > О») вүӨC1(kn)n2+nвҲ’1 exp
 
вҲ’Пғ2
0Пғ1
вҲҡ
kn
8n
(О» вҲ§О»2)
!
.
(39)
From Tail Bounds to Expectations.
The exponential tail bound (39) converts to an expecta-
tion via E[X2] =
R вҲһ
0 2x Pr(X > x) dx. Substituting Pr(вҲҘЛҶBвҲ’BвҲҘ> О») вүӨC1(kn)n2+nвҲ’1 exp(вҲ’c1
вҲҡ
kn(О»вҲ§
О»2)) for c1 = Пғ2
0Пғ1/(8n), the integral gives E[вҲҘЛҶB вҲ’BвҲҘ2] = O((log kn)/
вҲҡ
kn). The logarithmic factor
arises from the polynomial pre-factor (kn)n2+nвҲ’1, while the 1/
вҲҡ
kn rate comes from the exponen-
tial decay in
вҲҡ
kn. In short, exponential concentration in
вҲҡ
k translates to O(1/
вҲҡ
k) expected error
after integration, matching the optimal learning rate for linear regression with exploration.
With a similar argument as in the proof of Theorem 6 in Keskin and Zeevi 2014,
E
h
(
 ЛҶОұkn+1 вҲ’Оұ

2 +
 ЛҶBkn+1 вҲ’B

2)2i
вүӨ20C1n5 log(kn + 1)
Пғ1
вҲҡ
kn
.
(40)
Translating Parameter Error to Solution Error.
Parameter error вҲҘЛҶB вҲ’BвҲҘ2 does not di-
rectly yield solution error вҲҘЛҶd вҲ’dПҖ,tвҲҘ2. Two intermediate results bridge this gap. First, second-
order growth (Lemma 14): the revenue function r(d) is strongly concave in demand space with
curvature constant Оәcurv := вҲ’О»max(BвҲ’1 + BвҲ’вҠӨ)/2 > 0, so small perturbations in the objec-
tive or constraints cause small deviations in the optimal solution. Second, Lipschitz continu-
ity (Lemma 13): combining second-order growth with constraint structure gives вҲҘЛҶd вҲ’dПҖ,tвҲҘ2 вүӨ
CОәвҲ’1
curv(вҲҘЛҶB вҲ’BвҲҘ2 + вҲҘЛҶОұ вҲ’ОұвҲҘ2)вҖ”a direct translation from parameter error to solution error. The
constant CОәвҲ’1
curv depends on problem conditioning: stronger concavity (larger Оәcurv) yields better
sensitivity.
The following lemma on Lipschitz continuity of strongly convex optimization problems translates
parameter error into solution error вҲҶt
I.
Lemma 13 (Prop 4.32, Bonnans and Shapiro (2013)). Suppose the constraint optimization problem
max
pвҲҲP
r(d) = pвҠӨd
s.t.
d = Оұ + Bp,
Ad вүӨ
ct
T вҲ’t + 1
d вүҘ0,
satisfies second-order growth condition r(d) вүӨr(dПҖ,t)вҲ’Оә(Dist
 d, DПҖ,t
)2 for any d in the feasible set
and the optimal solution set DПҖ,t. Then for any optimal solution ЛҶd to the quadratic programming
max
pвҲҲP
pвҠӨd
s.t.
d = ЛҶОұ + ЛҶBp,
Ad вүӨ
ct
T вҲ’t + 1
d вүҘ0,
40
there exists constant C2 such that
Dist
  ЛҶd, DПҖ,t
вүӨC2ОәвҲ’1 B вҲ’ЛҶB

2 + вҲҘОұ вҲ’ЛҶОұвҲҘ2

holds for optimal solution ЛҶd of the second constrained programming problem and all ( ЛҶОұ, ЛҶB) such that
B вҲ’ЛҶB

2 +вҲҘОұ вҲ’ЛҶОұвҲҘ2 < Оҙ, where Оҙ > 0 depends on the local curvature of the objective, equivalently
on вҲ’О»max(BвҲ’1 + BвҲ’вҠӨ).
By Lemma 13, it suffices to show that there exists Оә > 0 such that r(d) вүӨr(dПҖ,t)вҲ’Оә(Dist
 d, DПҖ,t
)2
for any d in the feasible set. The following lemma verifies this second-order growth condition: the
revenue function r(d) is strongly concave around dПҖ,t, with growth rate characterized by the sym-
metric Hessian BвҲ’1 + BвҲ’вҠӨin demand space.
This strong concavity is what allows parameter
estimation errors to translate into bounded solution errors.
Lemma 14. For any d in the feasible set, we have
r(d) вҲ’r(dПҖ,t) вүӨвҲ’ОәcurvDist
 d, dПҖ,t2,
Оәcurv := вҲ’1
2О»max(BвҲ’1 + BвҲ’вҠӨ) > 0.
Combining the Two Lemmas.
Apply Lemma 14 with Оә = Оәcurv to verify the second-order
growth condition, then invoke Lemma 13 with ( ЛҶОұ, ЛҶB) = ( ЛҶОұkn+1, ЛҶBkn+1) to obtain:
 Лңdk вҲ’dПҖ,kn+1
2 вүӨC2ОәвҲ’1
curv
 ЛҶBkn+1 вҲ’B

2 +
 ЛҶОұkn+1 вҲ’Оұ

2

.
(41)
This Lipschitz-type bound translates parameter concentration (40) into bounds on the estimation
error вҲҶt
I = Лңdk вҲ’dПҖ,kn+1. The factor ОәвҲ’1
curv reflects problem conditioning: ill-conditioned demand
matrices amplify parameter errors into larger solution errors. Since kn + 1 вүӨT + 1, (40) gives
E
 Лңdk вҲ’dПҖ,kn+1
2
2

вүӨC2
2ОәвҲ’2
curvE
h
(
 ЛҶОұkn+1 вҲ’Оұ

2 +
 ЛҶBkn+1 вҲ’B

2)2i
вүӨC3n5 log(T + 1)
Пғ1Оә2curv
вҲҡ
kn
,
where C3 depends on C1, C2. Therefore,
E
hвҲҶt
I
2
2
i
= E
 Лңdk вҲ’dПҖ,kn+1
2
2

вүӨC4n5 log(T + 1)
Пғ1Оә2curv
вҲҡ
kn
(42)
for some constant C4.
Total Error Bound.
Combining the bounds (36), (37), and (42) via decomposition (35) and the
triangle inequality вҲҘA + B + CвҲҘ2
2 вүӨ3(вҲҘAвҲҘ2
2 + вҲҘBвҲҘ2
2 + вҲҘCвҲҘ2
2) yields:
E
hвҲҶt2
2
i
вүӨ3
вҲҶt
I
2
2 +
вҲҶt
II
2
2 +
вҲҶt
III
2
2

вүӨ3
 
4n2d2
max
(t вҲ’1) + Пғ2
0 вҲҘBвҲҘ2
2
вҲҡ
t
+ C4n5 log(T + 1)
Пғ1Оә2curv
вҲҡ
kn
!
вүӨC5
вҲҡ
k
,
(43)
where C5 = 12 max{4n2d2
max, Пғ2
0 вҲҘBвҲҘ2
2 , C4ПғвҲ’1
1 n9/2ОәвҲ’2
curv log(T + 1)}.
The total error decays as
O(1/
вҲҡ
k) in epoch k, leading to O(
вҲҡ
T) regret when summed over all epochs.
41
E.1.4
Step 4: Epoch-Level Regret Analysis
Epoch Difference Decomposition.
Following the same telescoping approach as the full-information
backbone in (17), each epoch-level difference can be written as:
RT (Hybridk, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridk+1, FT )
= (T вҲ’kn)r(dПҖ,k) вҲ’
(k+1)n
X
t=kn+1
r(dt, Пөt) вҲ’(T вҲ’(k + 1)n)r(dПҖ,k+1).
(44)
Connection to Appendix D: Reusing the Three-Case Framework.
The same three-case
classification applies as in the full-information robust control backbone, with two differences tailored
to the learning setting. First, the modified threshold О¶[(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/4 + tвҲ’1/4] replaces О¶(T вҲ’
t + 1)вҲ’1/2: the additional tвҲ’1/4 term accounts for parameter estimation uncertainty, which decays
as O(tвҲ’1/2) and requires threshold O(tвҲ’1/4) for high-probability feasibility.
Second, constraint
violation probability now depends on both noise Пөt (as before) and estimation error вҲҶt (new in the
no-guidance baseline). The proof structure is otherwise unchanged: partition into Cases I/II/III,
apply concentration inequalities for Case I, show negligible cost for Case II, and combine for Case
III.
Three-Case Classification.
As in Appendix D, each epoch is classified by demand magnitudes.
The rounding threshold adapts to both forward-looking uncertainty (T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/4 and backward-
looking estimation error tвҲ’1/4:
вҖў Case (I): mini Лңdt
i вүҘО¶

(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/4 + tвҲ’1/4
for all kn + 1 вүӨt вүӨ(k + 1)n вҖ” all demands
large
вҖў Case (II): maxi Лңdt
i < О¶

(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/4 + tвҲ’1/4
for all kn + 1 вүӨt вүӨ(k + 1)n вҖ” all demands
small
вҖў Case (III): Mixed demands (neither Case I nor Case II)
Case (I): All Demands Large.
The analysis follows Appendix D with two modifications: the
rounding threshold becomes О¶

(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/4 + tвҲ’1/4
instead of О¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2, and the con-
straint violation probability must account for estimation error вҲҶt. Define the вҖңgoodвҖқ event:
Et
i =

dПҖ,t
i
вүҘПөt
i + вҲҶt
i
T вҲ’t

,
Ek =
n\
i=1
(k+1)n
\
t=kn+1
Et
i .
Recall the decomposition:
E
h
RT (Hybridk, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridk+1, FT )
i
= P(Ek)E
h
RT (Hybridk, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridk+1, FT )
Eki
+ P((Ek)c)E
h
RT (Hybridk, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridk+1, FT )
(Ek)ci
.
(45)
Following the same argument as in (19), define
gПҖ,k := вҲҮr(dПҖ,k) вҲ’pПҖ,k = BвҲ’вҠӨdПҖ,k + (BвҲ’1 вҲ’BвҲ’вҠӨ)Оұ,
pПҖ,k = BвҲ’1(dПҖ,k вҲ’Оұ).
42
Then
E
h
RT (Hybridk, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridk+1, FT )|Eki
= E
пЈ®
пЈ°(T вҲ’kn)r(dПҖ,k) вҲ’
(k+1)n
X
t=kn+1
r(dt, Пөt) вҲ’(T вҲ’(k + 1)n)r(dПҖ,k+1)|Ek
пЈ№
пЈ»
вүӨE
пЈ®
пЈ°вҲ’
(k+1)n
X
t=kn+1
(Пөt)вҠӨpt вҲ’
(k+1)n
X
t=kn+1
h
(вҲҶt)вҠӨBвҲ’1вҲҶt + вҲҮr(dПҖ,k)вҠӨвҲҶti
|Ek
пЈ№
пЈ»
+ (T вҲ’(k + 1)n)E
"
вҲҮr(dПҖ,k)вҠӨ
P(k+1)n
t=kn+1(вҲҶt + Пөt)
T вҲ’(k + 1)n
вҲ’(P(k+1)n
t=kn+1(Пөt + вҲҶt))вҠӨBвҲ’1(P(k+1)n
t=kn+1(Пөt + вҲҶt))
(T вҲ’(k + 1)n)2
|Ek
#
= E
пЈ®
пЈ°(gПҖ,k)вҠӨ
(k+1)n
X
t=kn+1
Пөt вҲ’
(k+1)n
X
t=kn+1
(Пөt)вҠӨBвҲ’1вҲҶt вҲ’(P(k+1)n
t=kn+1(Пөt + вҲҶt))вҠӨBвҲ’1(P(k+1)n
t=kn+1(Пөt + вҲҶt))
T вҲ’(k + 1)n
|Ek
пЈ№
пЈ».
(46)
Note that Пөt is independent of вҲҶt and has zero mean, so E

(Пөt)вҠӨBвҲ’1вҲҶt
= 0. Also,
gПҖ,k
2 вүӨ
BвҲ’1
2 (dmax + 2 вҲҘОұвҲҘ2),
вҲҶt
2 вүӨdmax.
Following the proof of (20) and (21),
P(Ek)E
пЈ®
пЈ°(gПҖ,k)вҠӨ
(k+1)n
X
t=kn+1
Пөt вҲ’
(k+1)n
X
t=kn+1
(Пөt)вҠӨBвҲ’1вҲҶt|Ek
пЈ№
пЈ»
вүӨ2
BвҲ’1
2 (dmax + 2 вҲҘОұвҲҘ2)P((Ek)c)1/2E
пЈ®
пЈ°
(k+1)n
X
t=kn+1
Пөt2
2
пЈ№
пЈ»
1/2
вүӨ2Пғ
BвҲ’1
2 (dmax + 2 вҲҘОұвҲҘ2)P((Ek)c)1/2
(47)
and
P(Ek)E
"
вҲ’(P(k+1)n
t=kn+1 Пөt + вҲҶt)вҠӨBвҲ’1(P(k+1)n
t=kn+1 Пөt + вҲҶt)
T вҲ’(k + 1)n
|Ek
#
вүӨ
2n
BвҲ’1
2
T вҲ’(k + 1)n
(k+1)n
X
t=kn+1
E
hПөt2
2 +
вҲҶt2
2
i
(a)
вүӨ
2n
BвҲ’1
2
T вҲ’(k + 1)n
(k+1)n
X
t=kn+1

Пғ2 + C5kвҲ’1/2
= 2n2 BвҲ’1
2
T вҲ’(k + 1)n

Пғ2 + C5kвҲ’1/2
,
(48)
where (a) applies (43).
Following the deduction in (22),
P((Ek)c)E
h
RT (Hybridk, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridk+1, FT )
(Ek)ci
43
вүӨ(T вҲ’kn)rmaxP((Ek)c) + вҲҡnПғP((Ek)c)1/2.
(49)
Combining (45), (46), (47), (48), and (49),
E
h
RT (Hybridk, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridk+1, FT )
i
вүӨ2Пғ
BвҲ’1
2 (dmax + 2 вҲҘОұвҲҘ2)P((Ek)c)1/2 + 2n2 BвҲ’1
2
T вҲ’(k + 1)n(Пғ2 + C5kвҲ’1/2) + (T вҲ’kn)rmaxP((Ek)c) + вҲҡnПғP((Ek)c)1/
(50)
To bound P((Ek)c), consider two events: It
i1 = {О¶((T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/4 + tвҲ’1/4)/3 вүҘ|вҲҶt
i|}; It
i2 =
{О¶((T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/4 + tвҲ’1/4)/3 вүҘ
Пөt
i
TвҲ’(k+1)n}. Then
P((Ek)c) вүӨ1 вҲ’P(вҲ©n
i=1 вҲ©(k+1)n
t=kn+1 (It
i1 вҲ©It
i2))
вүӨ
n
X
i=1
(k+1)n
X
t=kn+1
(P(It
i1) + P(It
i2)).
With (41), (36), (37) and (39), we have
P((It
i1)c)
вүӨP

4C2ОәвҲ’1
curv
 ЛҶОұkn+1 вҲ’Оұ

2 +
 ЛҶBkn+1 вҲ’B

2

+
2n
t вҲ’1dmax + Пғ0 вҲҘBвҲҘ2 tвҲ’1/4 > О¶((T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/4 + tвҲ’1/4)/3

вүӨP
  ЛҶОұkn+1 вҲ’Оұ

2 +
 ЛҶBkn+1 вҲ’B

2 > ОәcurvО¶((T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/4 + tвҲ’1/4)
24C2
!
вүӨC1(kn)n2+nвҲ’1 exp
 
вҲ’Пғ2
0Пғ1
вҲҡ
kn
8n
(О» вҲ§О»2)
!
вүӨC2
5/(n2T 2)
(51)
for some constant C5, where О» = ОәcurvО¶((T вҲ’t+1)вҲ’1/4+tвҲ’1/4)/(24C2). Under the chosen threshold
О¶, the exponential term is at most C2
5/(n2T 2). For Ic
i2, the derivation of (24) gives directly
P((It
i2)c)
вүӨP

О¶((T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/4 + tвҲ’1/4)/3 <
Пөt
i
T вҲ’(k + 1)n

вүӨexp

вҲ’О¶2(T вҲ’(k + 1)n)2
36Пғ2

вүӨC2
5/(n2T 2).
(52)
Combining (51) and (52),
P((Ek)c) вүӨ
n
X
i=1
(k+1)n
X
t=kn+1
(P(It
i1) + P(It
i2))
вүӨ2C2
5/T 2.
Substituting into (50),
E
h
RT (Hybridk, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridk+1, FT )
i
44
вүӨ2C5Пғ
BвҲ’1
2 (dmax + 2 вҲҘОұвҲҘ2)T вҲ’1 + 2n2 BвҲ’1
2
T вҲ’(k + 1)n(Пғ2 + C5kвҲ’1/2) + C2
5(T вҲ’kn)rmax/T 2 + C5
вҲҡnПғT вҲ’1.
(53)
Case (II): maxi Лңdt
i < О¶

(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/4 + tвҲ’1/4
, вҲҖkn + 1 вүӨt вүӨ(k + 1)n,
вҲҖkn + 1 вүӨt вүӨ
(k + 1)n.
This is the epoch-level analogue of (26). Replacing the boundary attraction threshold
О¶(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2 by О¶((T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/4 + tвҲ’1/4) and applying (43) to absorb the mismatch between
the estimated small-demand region and the true fluid demand gives:
E
h
RT (Hybridk, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridk+1, FT )
i
вүӨC6О¶2 h
(T вҲ’kn + 1)вҲ’1/2 + (kn)вҲ’1/2i
+ 8C5
BвҲ’1
2
вҲҡ
k
,
(54)
for an absolute constant C6.
Case (III): others.
Following the same argument as in Appendix D.1 and using (53), (54),
E
h
RT (Hybridk, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridk+1, FT )
i
вүӨC6О¶2 h
(T вҲ’kn + 1)вҲ’1/2 + (kn)вҲ’1/2i
+ 8C5
BвҲ’1
2
вҲҡ
k
+ 2C5Пғ
BвҲ’1
2 (dmax + 2 вҲҘОұвҲҘ2)T вҲ’1 + 2n2 BвҲ’1
2
T вҲ’(k + 1)n(Пғ2 + C5kвҲ’1/2) + C2
5(T вҲ’kn)rmax/T 2 + C5
вҲҡnПғT вҲ’1.
(55)
Wrap-up.
Combining (53), (54), and (55),
E
h
RT (Hybridk, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridk+1, FT )
i
вүӨC6О¶2 h
(T вҲ’kn + 1)вҲ’1/2 + (kn)вҲ’1/2i
+ 8C5
BвҲ’1
2
вҲҡ
k
+ 2C5Пғ
BвҲ’1
2 (dmax + 2 вҲҘОұвҲҘ2)T вҲ’1 + 2n2 BвҲ’1
2
T вҲ’(k + 1)n(Пғ2 + C5kвҲ’1/2) + C2
5(T вҲ’kn)rmax/T 2 + C5
вҲҡnПғT вҲ’1.
Substituting into (45),
RegretT  ПҖ

=
T вҖІ
X
k=1
E
h
RT (Hybridk, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridk+1, FT )
i
= O

(О¶2 + C5
BвҲ’1
2)
вҲҡ
T

.
F
Proofs for the Informed-Price Setting
This section analyzes the direct guidance setting where the firm has access to a certified demand
forecast from historical operations or a predictive model.
The key object is a certified anchor
(p0, d0) that can warm-start estimation when accurate enough, but creates persistent bias when it
is not. Before presenting our algorithm, we establish that any policy must suffer regret growing
with either the anchor quality or the data quantity.
45
F.1
Proof of Proposition 5
This proposition establishes an information-theoretic lower bound: no algorithm can escape в„Ұ(max{П„
вҲҡ
T, (Пө0)2T})
regret. The proof constructs two problem instances that are indistinguishable from offline data,
yet require different online strategies, so any algorithm suffers large regret on at least one.
Proof Roadmap
Proof Technique: Adversarial Instance Construction. We construct
two demand functions dОё, dОёвҖІ that: (1) share identical offline data distributionвҖ”any candidate
certified anchor (p0, d0) drawn from historical data is indistinguishable between the two instances,
so offline observation provides no information to distinguish them; (2) require different online
strategiesвҖ”the optimal prices differ (pвҲ—
Оё Мё= pвҲ—
ОёвҖІ), forcing any algorithm to choose one strategy or the
other; and (3) force large regret on at least one instanceвҖ”if the algorithm prices for Оё but the true
instance is ОёвҖІ (or vice versa), it suffers в„Ұ(max{П„
вҲҡ
T, (Пө0)2T}) regret. Together, these properties
confirm that the upper bound in Theorem 6 is tight.
We establish the lower bound by constructing two adversarial problem instances:
1. Instance Construction: Define two parameter sets (Оұ, B) = (2вҲҶ, вҲ’вҲҶIn) and (ОұвҖІ, BвҖІ) =
(3вҲҶ, вҲ’2вҲҶIn) with вҲҶ= T вҲ’ОІ for ОІ вҲҲ[0, 1/2). These instances:
вҖў Share identical offline data distribution P off (offline samples come from the same distri-
bution regardless of Оё or ОёвҖІ)
вҖў Require fundamentally different optimal prices: pвҲ—
Оё = 1 vs. pвҲ—
ОёвҖІ = 3/2
вҖў Force any algorithm to suffer regret в„Ұ(T 1вҲ’ОІ) on at least one instance
2. Information-Theoretic Argument: Use BretagnolleвҖ“Huber inequality to show: Regret(Оё)+
Regret(ОёвҖІ) вүҘ
T 1вҲ’ОІ
32
exp(вҲ’KL(PвҲҘQ)) where P, Q are joint offline+online distributions.
By
Lemma 15, the KL divergence factorizes as KL(PвҲҘQ) = E[PT
t=1 KL(PОё(pt)вҲҘQОёвҖІ(pt))] (offline
parts cancel). For Gaussian demands, KL(PОёвҲҘQОёвҖІ) = вҲҶ2(pt вҲ’1)2/2 = (вҲҶ/2) В· Regrett(Оё).
Choosing ОІ = Оі makes вҲҶ= T вҲ’Оі, so bounded regret on Оё implies exp(вҲ’KL) вүҘexp(вҲ’C/2)
and hence the в„Ұ(T 1вҲ’Оі) lower bound.
3. Reduction to the no-guidance baseline Lower Bound: For the в„Ұ(П„
вҲҡ
T) term, choose
ОІ = 1/2 вҲ’Оі/2 (so вҲҶ= T вҲ’(1вҲ’Оі)/2 and (Пө0)2 вҲјвҲҶ2 = T вҲ’(1вҲ’Оі)).
This makes the candi-
date certified anchor so inaccurate that it provides negligible benefit, reducing to the lower
bound from Lemma 4: в„Ұ(
вҲҡ
T). Setting Оі to balance the two terms yields the final bound
в„Ұ(max{П„
вҲҡ
T, (Пө0)2T}).
Implication: The bound follows from Proposition 5 by appropriate parameter scaling, confirming
that Theorem 6 achieves the optimal rate.
Construction of Adversarial Instances.
Following the approach of Lattimore and SzepesvВҙari
(2020) (Sec 15.2) and Cheung and Lyu (2024), we construct two demand functions that share
identical offline data distributions but require different online strategies:
dОё(p) = 2вҲҶвҲ’вҲҶp + Пө,
dОёвҖІ(p) = 3вҲҶвҲ’2вҲҶp + Пө,
with вҲҶ= T вҲ’ОІ, where Пө вҲјN(0, 1). The key feature is that both instances share the same offline
data distribution Poff, making them indistinguishable from historical data alone. For Proposition
5, we specialize to ОІ = Оі, so вҲҶ= T вҲ’Оі.
46
Regret Analysis Under Two Instances.
Let P on
ПҖ
and Qon
ПҖ
denote the online demand distri-
butions under policy ПҖ for instances Оё and ОёвҖІ, respectively. Define P and Q as the joint distributions
(P off, P on
ПҖ ) and (P off, Qon
ПҖ ). The expected regret under each instance is:
Regret
 ПҖ

Оё = EP
" T
X
t=1
вҲҶвҲ’1(вҲҶpt вҲ’вҲҶ)2
#
,
Regret
 ПҖ

ОёвҖІ = EQ
" T
X
t=1
2вҲҶвҲ’1 вҲҶpt вҲ’3вҲҶ
2
2
#
.
Information-Theoretic Lower Bound via BretagnolleвҖ“Huber.
For any set S вҠӮR, let
NT (S) denote the number of periods where pt вҲҲS. Consider the event that the algorithm prices
вҖқhighвҖқ (closer to ОёвҖІвҖҷs optimum):
I =
n
NT
 [5вҲҶ
4 , вҲһ)

> T
2
o
.
If the algorithm prices high (I occurs), it suffers regret under Оё; if it prices low (Ic), it suffers regret
under ОёвҖІ. By the BretagnolleвҖ“Huber inequality (Lattimore and SzepesvВҙari 2020, Thm 14.2):
Regret
 ПҖ, Оё

+ Regret
 ПҖ, ОёвҖІ
вүҘвҲҶ
16 В· T
2 В· P(I) + 2вҲҶ
16 В· T
2 В· Q(IC)
вүҘT 1вҲ’Оі
32 (P(I) + Q(IC))
вүҘT 1вҲ’Оі
32
exp(вҲ’KL
 P вҲҘQ

).
For Gaussian PОё(p) = N(2вҲҶвҲ’вҲҶp, 1) and QОёвҖІ(p) = N(3вҲҶвҲ’2вҲҶp, 1), we have
KL
 PОё(p) вҲҘQОёвҖІ(p)

= вҲҶ2(p вҲ’1)2
2
.
To bound exp(вҲ’KL
 P вҲҘQ

), we use the following lemma from Cheung and Lyu (2024). Because the
two instances share the same offline distribution, the KL divergence between the joint distributions
reduces to that of the online parts alone.
Lemma 15. Consider two instances with online distribution P, Q and shared offline dataset with
samples {(pвҲ’t, dвҲ’t)}N
t=1, then for any admissible policy ПҖ, it holds that
exp(вҲ’KL
 P вҲҘQ

) = exp
 
вҲ’EP
" T
X
t=1
KL
 PОё(pt) вҲҘQОёвҖІ(pt)

#!
.
By Lemma 15, we have
exp(вҲ’KL
 P вҲҘQ

) = exp
 
вҲ’EP
" T
X
t=1
KL
 PОё(pt) вҲҘQОёвҖІ(pt)

#!
= exp
 
вҲ’EP
" T
X
t=1
вҲҶ2(pt вҲ’1)2
2
#!
= exp

вҲ’вҲҶ
2 Regret
 ПҖ, Оё

47
вүҘexp

вҲ’вҲҶCT Оі
2

= exp(вҲ’C/2).
As a result, we have
Regret
 ПҖ, Оё

+ Regret
 ПҖ, ОёвҖІ
вүҘT 1вҲ’Оі
32
exp(вҲ’C/2) = в„Ұ(T 1вҲ’Оі).
Since we assumed Regret
 ПҖ, Оё

= O(T Оі) and established a lower bound of order T 1вҲ’Оі on the sum,
it follows that Regret
 ПҖ, ОёвҖІ
вүҘв„Ұ(T 1вҲ’Оі).
F.2
Proof of Proposition 7
This is a direct result following Proposition 5. We just need to take Пө of order T вҲ’(1вҲ’Оі)/2.
F.3
Proof of Theorem 6
Proof Roadmap
We prove the regret bound O(min{П„
вҲҡ
T, (Пө0)2T +CвҖІ log T}) using the candidate
certified anchor (p0, d0):
1. Estimate-Then-Select Decision: Algorithm 3 first decides whether to trust direct guid-
ance by comparing (Пө0)2T versus П„
вҲҡ
T:
вҖў If (Пө0)2T > П„
вҲҡ
T: Fall back to Algorithm 2 (the no-guidance baseline)
вҖў If (Пө0)2T вүӨП„
вҲҡ
T: invoke anchored regression around the candidate certified anchor
We focus on the second case, as the first case reduces to Theorem 3.
2. anchored regression Framework: Define the improved data variance quantity:
Jt := nвҲ’1
t
X
s=1
вҲҘps вҲ’p0вҲҘ2
2 вүҘtnвҲ’1Оҙ2
0
where Оҙ0 = вҲҘpвӢҶвҲ’p0вҲҘ2 measures distance from informed price to optimal price. This re-
places the O(tвҲ’1/2) variance growth in Appendix E.1 with O(t) linear growth, accelerating
estimation by a factor of t3/2.
3. Enhanced Parameter Estimation Bound: Using anchored regression:
min
Оұ,B
X
t
вҲҘdt вҲ’(Оұ + Bpt)вҲҘ2
subject to
вҲҘd0 вҲ’(Оұ + Bp0)вҲҘ2 вүӨ(Пө0)2
we obtain improved bounds:
вҖў E[вҲҘЛҶОұt вҲ’ОұвҲҘ2
2 + вҲҘЛҶBt вҲ’BвҲҘ2
2] = O(log t/
вҲҡ
t) (vs. O(n5/
вҲҡ
k) without informed prior)
вҖў Misspecification contributes additive (Пө0)2 term per period
4. Modified Single-Step Analysis: Follow the three-case framework from Appendix D.1, but
with:
вҖў Rounding threshold: О¶[(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2 + tвҲ’1/2] (tighter than no-info case)
48
вҖў Error decomposition: вҲҶt = вҲҶt
I + вҲҶt
II (no exploration noise вҲҶt
III due to anchoring)
вҖў Improved вҲҶt
I bound from step 3
5. Final Aggregation: Sum over all T periods:
вҖў Estimation error: PT
t=1 O(log t/
вҲҡ
t) = O(log T) (logarithmic, due to linear variance
growth)
вҖў Misspecification: PT
t=1 2(Пө0)2 = O((Пө0)2T)
вҖў Rounding and noise: O(О¶2 log T + Пғ2вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2 log T)
Combining yields O((Пө0)2T + CвҖІ log T) where CвҖІ = Пғ0dmaxвҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2 + n2Пғ2вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2 + О¶2.
Key Insight: Why Logarithmic Regret? The candidate certified anchor (p0, d0) is the device
that makes direct guidance useful: when Пө0 is small, it accelerates parameter learning from ЛңO(
вҲҡ
T)
to O(log T). The mechanism is linear variance growth: in the no-guidance baseline, deliberate
perturbations yield Jt = O(
вҲҡ
t) from (38), whereas here the anchor ensures Jt = Pt
s=1 вҲҘps вҲ’
p0вҲҘ2
2 вүіtОҙ2
0 with Оҙ0 = вҲҘpвҲ—вҲ’p0вҲҘ2. This linear growth yields faster convergence: parameter error
decays as E[вҲҘЛҶB вҲ’BвҲҘ2] = O(log t/t) (vs. O(1/
вҲҡ
t) without anchoring), and summing over t gives
PT
t=1 O(log t/t) = O(log T).
The trade-off is explicit: accurate predictions (Пө0 вҶ’0, small Оҙ0)
yield near-optimal O(log T) regret, while poor predictions (Пө0 large) incur bias cost O((Пө0)2T) that
dominates, degrading to O(
вҲҡ
T) when Пө0 > T вҲ’1/4.
Comparison to Appendix E.1: The main technical difference is the variance analysis: linear
growth Jt вүҘtnвҲ’1Оҙ2
0 (enabled by the candidate certified anchor) versus sublinear growth Jt = O(
вҲҡ
t)
(from exploration noise alone). This distinction propagates through the entire proof.
F.3.1
Part A: Problem Setup and Estimate-Then-Select Decision
In this section, we follow the same approach as in Appendix E.1. We only need to consider the
case (Пө0)2T вүӨП„
вҲҡ
T and the candidate certified anchor is used (Algorithm 3 selects the direct
guidance/anchored regression branch). Recall the re-solve constrained programming problem:
max
pвҲҲP
r = pвҠӨd
s.t.
d = Оұ + Bp,
Ad вүӨ
ct
T вҲ’t + 1,
(56)
where ct is the inventory level at the beginning of time t. We use the single-step difference decom-
position:
RegretT  ПҖ

= E
" T
X
t=1
RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )
#
=
T
X
t=1
E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

.
(57)
49
We proceed by bounding the term E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

for 1 вүӨt вүӨT. We
define вҲҶt = dt вҲ’dПҖ,t similarly. Let l =
mod (t, n). Then we have
вҲҶt = ( Лңdt вҲ’dt)
|
{z
}
:=вҲҶt
I
+ Пғ0tвҲ’1/2Bel
|
{z
}
:=вҲҶt
II
.
(58)
It follows directly that
вҲҶt
II

2 вүӨПғ0tвҲ’1/2 вҲҘBвҲҘ2 .
(59)
F.3.2
Part B: Anchored Regression Framework and Parameter Estimation
Prediction Error Analysis.
The per-period revenue loss scales with the squared prediction
error вҲҘвҲҶt
IвҲҘ2
2 = вҲҘ( ЛҶBt вҲ’B)(pt вҲ’p0)вҲҘ2
2 and the perturbation cost. We distinguish two regimes for the
design matrix eigenvalue О»min(Vt), which captures how fast the algorithm learns:
1. Distal Regime (вҲҘpвӢҶвҲ’p0вҲҘ> Оҙ > 0 for some Оҙ > 0): The informed price is far from the true
optimal.
Example: Suppose true optimal price pвҲ—= 5, informed price p0 = 3. As prices converge
toward pвҲ—= 5, we have вҲҘps вҲ’p0вҲҘвүҘ|5 вҲ’3| вҲ’Оө = 2 вҲ’Оө for all s (always far from anchor).
This ensures О»min(Vt) = Pt
s=1 вҲҘps вҲ’p0вҲҘ2 вүіtОҙ2 with Оҙ = 2вҖ”linear growth. Consequently,
вҲҘЛҶBt вҲ’BвҲҘ2
F = O(1/t) (fast learning). Since вҲҘpt вҲ’p0вҲҘis bounded by O(1) (prices stay within
[L, U]), prediction error вҲҘвҲҶt
IвҲҘ2
2 = вҲҘ( ЛҶBt вҲ’B)(pt вҲ’p0)вҲҘ2 = O(1/t).
2. Local Regime (pвӢҶвүҲp0): The informed price is nearly optimal.
Example: Suppose pвҲ—вүҲp0 = 5 (informed price nearly optimal). Prices oscillate near p0 =
5 with perturbation magnitude Пғ0sвҲ’1/2, so вҲҘps вҲ’p0вҲҘвҲјsвҲ’1/2.
Design matrix grows as
О»min(Vt) = Pt
s=1(sвҲ’1/2)2 = Pt
s=1 sвҲ’1 вҲјlog tвҖ”logarithmic growth (much slower). This yields
вҲҘЛҶBt вҲ’BвҲҘ2
F = O(1/ log t) (slower learning). But: prediction error is evaluated at pt вүҲp0,
so the multiplicative factor вҲҘpt вҲ’p0вҲҘ2 вҲјtвҲ’1 is tiny. Overall: вҲҘвҲҶt
IвҲҘ2
2 вҲј(1/ log t) В· tвҲ’1 =
O(1/(t log t)) = o(1/t).
The informed price being nearly optimal compensates for slower
learningвҖ”accurate parameter estimates are unnecessary when prices are already near the
optimum.
In both cases, the revenue loss is dominated by the O(tвҲ’1) perturbation cost, so summing over t
yields logarithmic regret. Combining with the bias term:
E

вҲҘвҲҶtвҲҘ2
2

вүӨCvarПғ2
t
+ Cbias(Пө0)2.
(60)
This O(1/t) decay, when summed over t, produces the logarithmic regret. Let Оәcurv := вҲ’О»max(BвҲ’1+
BвҲ’вҠӨ)/2 > 0 denote the curvature constant from Lemma 14. From the tail bound analysis and the
linear growth of Jt, we obtain:
E
hвҲҶt
I
2
2
i
вүӨC8n5ОәвҲ’2
curv
Пғ2t
+ (Пө0)2.
(61)
Plugging (59) and (61) into (58)
E
hвҲҶt2
2
i
вүӨ2
вҲҶt
I
2
2 +
вҲҶt
II
2
2

50
вүӨ2
C8n5ОәвҲ’2
curv
Пғ2t
+ (Пө0)2 + Пғ2
0tвҲ’1 вҲҘBвҲҘ2
2

вүӨC9
t + (Пө0)2,
(62)
where C9 = 8 max{C8n5ОәвҲ’2
curv/Пғ2, Пғ2
0 вҲҘBвҲҘ2
2}.
The bias term (Пө0)2 does not decay with t and is
tracked separately in the case analysis below.
Now we proceed with almost the same argument as in Appendix E.1. We consider three cases:
Case (I) mini Лңdt
i вүҘО¶

(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2 + tвҲ’1/2
; Case (II) maxi Лңdt
i вүӨО¶

(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2 + tвҲ’1/2
; Case
(III) others.
Case (I).
We follow the same argument as in the derivation of (53), except that we replace the
bound on E
hвҲҶt2
2
i
with (62), the tail bounds (51)вҖ“(52) with the rounding threshold О¶

(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2 + tвҲ’1/2
,
and use the linear growth Jt вүіtОҙ2
0 from anchored regression. This yields
E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

вүӨ4C9Пғ0
BвҲ’1
2 dmaxT вҲ’1 + 4n2 BвҲ’1
2
T вҲ’t
(Пғ2 + C9T вҲ’1) + 2C2
9(T вҲ’t + 1)rmax/T 2 + C0
вҲҡnПғT вҲ’1 + 2(Пө0)2.
(63)
Case (II).
By the same argument as in the derivation of (54), replacing the rounding threshold
with О¶

(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1/2 + tвҲ’1/2
, we obtain
E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

вүӨ8О¶2 
(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1 + tвҲ’1
+ 8C9
BвҲ’1
2
t
.
(64)
Case (III).
By the same argument as in the derivation of (55), we obtain
E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

вүӨ4C9Пғ0
BвҲ’1
2 dmaxT вҲ’1 + 4n2 BвҲ’1
2
T вҲ’t
(Пғ2 + C9T вҲ’1) + 2C2
9(T вҲ’t + 1)rmax/T 2 + C0
вҲҡnПғT вҲ’1 + 2(Пө0)2
+ 8О¶2 
(T вҲ’t + 1)вҲ’1 + tвҲ’1
+ 8C9
BвҲ’1
2
t
.
(65)
Wrap-up.
Combining (63), (64), and (65) and summing over t = 1, . . . , T yields the total regret.
We separate the intrinsic cost terms (scaling with Пғ2/(T вҲ’t), present even under full information)
from the learning cost terms (scaling with C9/t, where C9 вҲқПғ2).
RegretT  ПҖ

=
T
X
t=1
E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

вүӨ
T
X
t=1
 
4n2 BвҲ’1
2 Пғ2
T вҲ’t
+
16О¶2
T вҲ’t + 1
!
+
T
X
t=1
 
8C9
BвҲ’1
2
t
+ 16О¶2
t
!
+
T
X
t=1
2(Пө0)2 + O(1)
= O((О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)Пғ2 log T)
|
{z
}
intrinsic cost
+ O((О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)Пғ2 log T)
|
{z
}
learning cost
+O((Пө0)2T)
51
= O
 (О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)Пғ2 log T + (Пө0)2T

.
The logarithmic coefficient decomposes into the baseline intrinsic cost from the fluid re-solve heuris-
tic and the additional learning cost from parameter estimation around the candidate certified an-
chor, both scaling with the noise variance Пғ2.
G
Proofs for Surrogate-Assisted Pricing
We now consider the setting where the firm has access to offline data from a surrogate marketвҖ”
for example, historical pricing and demand data from a different geographic region or customer
segment. This signal provides information about estimation rather than a direct action recommen-
dation. Although the surrogate market may have different demand parameters, its price-demand
correlation structure can reduce estimation variance. The main idea is to construct control vari-
ates from this surrogate data that adjust offline observations to the current online price, thereby
reducing the effective noise in parameter estimation. The challenge lies in quantifying the variance
reduction while accounting for model mismatch.
G.1
Proof of Theorem 8
The proof keeps the same hybrid-policy decomposition as Theorem 3 (Appendix E.1), with one key
difference: instead of the standard OLS estimation error (scaling with raw variance Пғ2
d), we obtain
a variance-reduced bound scaling with the oracle variance Varorc through control variates. Lemmas
17вҖ“19 provide the concentration results needed for auxiliary guidance.
G.1.1
Proof Roadmap
We decompose the proof into the following steps:
1. Decompose total regret using the same periodic hybrid policy as Theorem 3.
2. Decompose the demand error вҲҶt = dt вҲ’dПҖ,k into estimation error вҲҶt
I, drift error вҲҶt
II, and
perturbation error вҲҶt
III.
3. Bound вҲҘЛҶBkn+1 вҲ’BвҲҘF using surrogate-assisted OLS (Lemmas 17вҖ“19).
4. Translate parameter estimation error into demand decision error вҲҶt
I using Lipschitz con-
tinuity and second-order growth from the no-guidance baseline analysis (Lemmas 5вҖ“6 in
Appendix E.1).
5. Aggregate single-period regret bounds over k = 1, . . . , T/n.
G.1.2
Step 1: Metric Entropy and Uniform Convergence
Why Metric Entropy?
Our price space P = [L, U]n is continuous, so we cannot apply union
bounds directly over all p вҲҲPвҖ”the probability of a concentration failure would sum to infinity.
The remedy is to discretize via an Оө-net.
If we control estimation errors at finitely many grid
points {p1, . . . , pN } covering P, Lipschitz continuity of the demand function extends concentration
bounds to all prices. Metric entropy log N(P, Оө) quantifies the grid size: N(P, Оө) is the minimum
number of в„“2-balls of radius Оө needed to cover P. For bounded boxes [L, U]n, metric entropy grows
polynomially in n and logarithmically in 1/Оө, so the union bound over the net remains tractable.
52
Since P вҠҶRn is continuous, we cannot apply concentration inequalities directly for all prices
simultaneously. Instead, we use covering number arguments.
Lemma 16 (Metric Entropy for Bounded Sets (Vershynin 2018)). For a bounded box P = [L, U]n,
the metric entropy satisfies log N(P, Оө) вүӨn log(2(U вҲ’L)/Оө), where N(P, Оө) is the minimum number
of в„“2-balls of radius Оө needed to cover P.
Using an Оө-net {p1, . . . , pN } with N = N(P, Оө), any p вҲҲP can be approximated by some pi
with вҲҘpвҲ’piвҲҘ2 вүӨОө. We first prove concentration for the finite set {p1, . . . , pN } using union bounds,
then extend to all p вҲҲP via Lipschitz continuity.
G.1.3
Step 2: Offline Covariance Estimation
Intuition.
Constructing control variates requires the surrogate covariance matrix ОЈS = Var(St(p)).
Under the parametric assumption (constant covariance across prices), ОЈS does not depend on p, so
all offline samples can be pooled to form the sample covariance bОЈoff
S . Standard concentration rates
apply: error scales as
p
n/N (dimension n divided by sample size N). This is a key advantage of
auxiliary guidance: the variance structure can be learned offline without consuming online samples.
We estimate the surrogate covariance matrix ОЈS = Var(St(p)) from the offline data. Under the
parametric assumption (constant covariance), this reduces to the standard sample covariance of the
residuals.
Lemma 17 (Offline Covariance Concentration). With probability at least 1 вҲ’Оҙ, the empirical
surrogate covariance bОЈoff
S
satisfies:
вҲҘbОЈoff
S вҲ’ОЈSвҲҘ2 вүӨCcov
r
n + log(1/Оҙ)
N
.
The proof follows from standard concentration inequalities for sample covariance matrices of
sub-Gaussian random vectors (Wainwright 2019).
G.1.4
Step 3: MLA Coefficient Estimation and Centering
MLA Coefficient Challenge: From Nonparametric to Parametric.
The optimal control
variate weight О“вҲ—(p) = ОЈdS(p)ОЈS(p)вҲ’1 determines how to вҖңtransportвҖқ offline surrogate observa-
tions St(poff) to online prices pt. If О“вҲ—varies with price p (e.g., demand sensitivity differs across
price ranges), we face a nonparametric regression problem: learning О“вҲ—(В·) : Rn вҶ’RnГ—n from fi-
nite samplesвҖ”a statistically hard task due to the curse of dimensionality. Under the parametric
assumption (constant covariance across price space), however, О“вҲ—is constant and does not de-
pend on p. This reduces the learning problem to finite-dimensional regression, making estimation
tractable. We use Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR) for flexibility, but analyze the finite-rank ker-
nel case (e.g., linear or polynomial kernels) where KRR reduces to standard Ridge Regression on
features П•(p) вҲҲRDfeat, yielding sharp concentration bounds.
The optimal control variate coefficient О“вҲ—(p) = ОЈdS(p)ОЈS(p)вҲ’1 and the centering mean mвӢҶ(p) =
E[St(p)] are unknown.
Estimation Error.
We estimate О“вҲ—and mвӢҶ(p) using Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR). For the
theoretical bounds, we analyze the class of Finite-Rank Kernels (e.g., Linear or Polynomial).
Let П•(p) вҲҲRDfeat be the finite-dimensional feature map associated with the kernel. In this setting,
KRR is equivalent to Ridge Regression on the features П•(p). We invoke standard concentration
53
results for regularized linear regression with fixed or sub-Gaussian design (e.g., Wainwright 2019,
Theorem 2.2 and Example 2.12). For a regression problem with effective dimension deff and sample
size M, let ЛҶОё denote the estimator of ОёвҲ—. Provided the design matrix covariance has minimum
eigenvalue bounded away from zero, the estimation error satisfies the following tail bound for any
Оҙ вҲҲ(0, 1):
P
 
вҲҘЛҶОё вҲ’ОёвҲ—вҲҘF вүҘCПғ
r
deff + log(1/Оҙ)
M
!
вүӨОҙ,
where C is a universal constant and Пғ is the sub-Gaussian parameter of the noise. Applying this
to our setting with effective dimension deff вүҲnВ·Dfeat (which is O(n2) for a linear kernel), we define
the high-probability error bound MLAt,N(Оҙ) as:
MLAt,N(Оҙ) := CMLA
 r
deff + log(1/Оҙ)
t
+
r
deff + log(1/Оҙ)
N
!
.
Lemma 18 (MLA Estimation Error). Under the parametric assumption, and with the minimum
eigenvalues of the design matrices bounded away from zero (guaranteed by our perturbation), for
any Оҙ вҲҲ(0, 1) and with probability at least 1 вҲ’Оҙ:
вҲҘbО“t вҲ’О“вҲ—вҲҘF + вҲҘВҜmN(p) вҲ’mвӢҶ(p)вҲҘ2 вүӨMLAt,N(Оҙ).
G.1.5
Step 4: Pseudo-Observation Construction and Variance Reduction
Control Variate Logic: Transporting Offline Observations to Online Prices.
For offline
sample i collected at price p(i)
off, we observe demand d(i)
off,j. To вҖңtransportвҖқ this observation to the
current online price pt, we adjust for the price-dependent bias: Лңd(i)
off,j = d(i)
off,j вҲ’(ЛҶht)вҠӨ(p(i)
off вҲ’pt). If
ЛҶh accurately estimates the demand gradient, this adjustment removes the price-dependent bias,
leaving only the noise component. The key insight is that the noise in demand (after removing
price effects) has variance Пғ2
eff вүӨПғ2 (the Schur complement)вҖ”smaller than the raw variance Пғ2.
Constructing pseudo-observations that isolate this reduced-variance noise is exactly how auxiliary
guidance lowers the learning cost without changing the control backbone itself. The ratio Пғ2/Пғ2
eff
quantifies the benefit: stronger correlation between true and surrogate demand yields a larger
reduction.
We now construct pseudo-observations from the offline data:
Лңd(i)
off,j = d(i)
off,j вҲ’(ЛҶht)вҠӨ(p(i)
off вҲ’pt),
for each offline sample i вҲҲ[N]. Subtracting the predicted demand difference based on the price
gap p(i)
off вҲ’pt adjusts each offline observation to behave as if it were collected at the current online
price pt.
This control variate construction reduces the effective variance from Пғ2 to
Пғ2
eff = Пғ2 вҲ’ОЈвҠӨ
crossОЈвҲ’1
off ОЈcross,
the Schur complement in the joint covariance matrix of (doff, d).
The stronger the correlation
between surrogate and target markets (i.e., the larger вҲҘОЈcrossвҲҘ), the greater the variance reduction.
54
G.1.6
Step 5: Self-Normalized Anytime Bound
Define the augmented design matrix
ЛңP t =
"
t вҲ’1 + N
PtвҲ’1
s=1(ps)вҠӨ+ PN
i=1(p(i)
off)вҠӨ
PtвҲ’1
s=1 ps + PN
i=1 p(i)
off
PtвҲ’1
s=1 ps(ps)вҠӨ+ PN
i=1 p(i)
off(p(i)
off)вҠӨ
#
,
which combines t вҲ’1 online samples with N pseudo-observations. The OLS parameter estimate is
"
ЛҶОұt
j
ЛҶОІt
j
#
= ( ЛңP t)вҖ 
 
Dt
j +
N
X
i=1
"
Лңd(i)
off,j
Лңd(i)
off,j В· p(i)
off
#!
,
where Dt
j contains the online demand observations for product j.
Lemma 19 (Self-Normalized Concentration with Pseudo-Observations). For any Оҙ вҲҲ(0, 1) and all
t вүҘ1, with probability at least 1 вҲ’Оҙ,
вҲҘЛҶBt вҲ’BвҲҘF вүӨCSN
s
Пғ2
effn log(nt/Оҙ)
О»min( ЛңP t)
+ CMLA В· MLAt,N,
where CSN is a universal constant.
Link to Lemma 19.
The augmented design matrix ЛңP t combines t вҲ’1 online samples with N
pseudo-observations, increasing the effective sample size. Lemma 19 (proved in Appendix I) shows
that the resulting parameter estimation error scales with: (1) Пғeff (not Пғ)вҖ”the variance-reduced
noise from control variates, and (2) 1/
q
О»min( ЛңP t)вҖ”the precision of the augmented design matrix,
which grows faster than 1/
вҲҡ
t due to the offline samples. The CMLA В· MLAt,N term accounts for
imperfect MLA coefficient estimation (Step 3); when ЛҶО“ is accurate, this term is negligible, and the
dominant error is the variance-reduced term Пғeff/
q
О»min( ЛңP t).
G.1.7
Step 6: Effective Sample Size and Variance-Driven Bound
Effective Sample Size Intuition.
Offline data does not simply add N samplesвҖ”it adds N
samples weighted by how well the offline design aligns with online needs. The effective sample size
neff quantifies this alignment through the ratio of design matrix precisions:
neff = О»min( ЛңP t)
О»min(P t) вүҲ1 + NО»min(ОЈoff)
О»min(P t/t) .
Two factors govern this formula. First, О»min(ОЈoff) measures the вҖңrichnessвҖқ of the offline design:
if offline prices vary widely across all directions in price space, О»min(ОЈoff) is large and each offline
sample is highly informative. Second, О»min(P t/t) measures the precision of the online design: if
online prices also vary widely, the online data is already informative, reducing the marginal benefit
of offline data. When the offline design is rich (О»min(ОЈoff) large) and the online design is sparse
(О»min(P t/t) small), the gain neff вү«1 is substantial.
Under the quasi-uniform offline coverage condition, the offline price design covariance is nonde-
generate: О»min(ОЈoff) вүҘcoff for some coff > 0.
55
Corollary 20 (Variance-Driven Lower Bound). If N вүҘCПғвҲ’2
eff n log(nt), then with high probability,
вҲҘЛҶBt вҲ’BвҲҘF = O(NвҲ’1/2),
matching the offline statistical rate independent of t.
With enough offline data, the parameter estimation error becomes independent of the online
horizon t, eliminating the burn-in period that would otherwise be needed for parameter learning.
G.1.8
Step 7: Regret Decomposition
As in Theorem 3 (Appendix E.1), we decompose the total regret using periodic hybrid policies. For
T вҖІ = T/n periods:
RegretT (ПҖ) =
T вҖІ
X
k=1
E[RT (Hybridkn+1, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybrid(k+1)n+1, FT )],
where the hybrid policy uses estimated parameters (ЛҶОұkn+1, ЛҶBkn+1) up to time kn and true param-
eters thereafter.
G.1.9
Step 8: Error Decomposition
For each period k, the demand error at time t вҲҲ[kn + 1, (k + 1)n] decomposes as
вҲҶt := dt вҲ’dПҖ,k = вҲҶt
I + вҲҶt
II + вҲҶt
III,
where вҲҶt
I is the parameter estimation error, вҲҶt
II = O(n/t) is the drift error, and вҲҶt
III = O(Пғ0tвҲ’1/4)
is the exploration perturbation.
G.1.10
Step 9: Bounding Estimation Error with Surrogate Assistance
By Lemma 19, at time t = kn + 1:
вҲҘЛҶBkn+1 вҲ’BвҲҘF вүӨCSN
s
Varorc В· n log(kn)
О»min( ЛңP kn)
+ CMLA В· MLAkn,N.
Under perturbation, О»min( ЛңP kn) вүі
вҲҡ
kn, so
E[вҲҘЛҶBkn+1 вҲ’BвҲҘ2
F ] вүІVarorc
вҲҡ
kn
+ (MLAkn,N)2.
G.1.11
Step 10: From Parameter Error to Decision Error
By Lipschitz continuity and second-order growth (Lemmas 5вҖ“6 from Appendix E.1),
E[вҲҘвҲҶt
IвҲҘ2
2] вүІвҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2
2
 Varorc
(kn)1/2 + MLA2
kn,N

.
Compared to Theorem 3, this replaces Пғ2
d/(kn)1/2 with Varorc/(kn)1/2.
56
G.1.12
Step 11: Aggregation and Final Regret Bound
The single-step regret for period k is
SingleStepk вүІ(О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)
вҲҡVarorc
вҲҡ
k
+ MLA2
kn,N

.
Summing over k = 1, . . . , T/n:
RegretT (ПҖ) =
T/n
X
k=1
SingleStepk.
The first term sums to PT/n
k=1 kвҲ’1/2 вүҚ
p
T/n. For the second term, we use the expected squared
error derived from the tail bound in Lemma 18. Integrating the tail probability P(вҲҘbО“t вҲ’О“вҲ—вҲҘF вүҘ
u) вүӨexp(вҲ’ctu2) yields E[вҲҘbО“t вҲ’О“вҲ—вҲҘ2
F ] вүІn2/t. Thus:
T/n
X
k=1
E[MLA2
kn,N] вүҚ
T/n
X
k=1
 n2
kn + n2
N

вүҚn log(T/n) + T
N n.
The final bound is:
RegretT (ПҖ) = O

(О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)
p
Varorc В· T + n log T + nT
N

.
G.1.13
Additional Technical Considerations
A subtle issue arises when the online prices pt differ substantially from the offline prices p(i)
off. The
pseudo-observation construction relies on centering at pt, introducing a bias.
Lemma 21 (Centering Mismatch Bound). Under quasi-uniform offline design with support [L, U]n,
the centering mismatch satisfies
E
h
вҲҘЛңd(i)
off,j вҲ’(d(i)
off,j вҲ’О“вҲ—(p(i)
off)вҠӨ(S(zi, p(i)
off) вҲ’mвӢҶ(p(i)
off)))вҲҘ2
2
i
вүӨCcenterMLA2
t,N.
Thus the centering mismatch is controlled by the MLA error rate, and the overall error analysis
remains valid.
For highly nonuniform offline designs, one can use kernel-weighted pseudo-observations:
Лңd(i)
off,j = wt
i

d(i)
off,j вҲ’(ЛҶht)вҠӨ(p(i)
off вҲ’pt)

,
where wt
i = exp(вҲ’вҲҘp(i)
off вҲ’ptвҲҘ2
2/(2П„ 2)) is a Gaussian kernel. This localizes the variance reduction
to a neighborhood of pt, improving robustness at the cost of a smaller effective sample size neff =
PN
i=1 wt
i. The analysis extends via localized versions of Lemmas 17вҖ“19.
57
G.2
Supplementary Details for Section 6
G.2.1
Worked Scalar Example
To illustrate the Schur complement variance reduction formula (5), consider a single-product case
(n = 1) with:
вҖў True demand variance: Var(d) = 4
вҖў Surrogate variance: Var(S) = 9
вҖў Correlation: ПҒ = 0.8
вҖў Cross-covariance: Cov(d, S) = ПҒ
p
Var(d)Var(S) = 0.8 В· 2 В· 3 = 4.8
Then:
О“вҲ—= ОЈdSОЈвҲ’1
S
= 4.8/9 = 0.533,
Var( Лңd) = Var(d) вҲ’ОЈdSОЈвҲ’1
S ОЈSd = 4 вҲ’4.8 В· 0.533 = 1.44.
Variance reduces from 4 to 1.44 (64% reduction), confirming the formula (1 вҲ’ПҒ2) = 0.36.
For the special case of scalar targets (e.g., revenue rt = pвҠӨ
t dt), the variance reduction is quan-
tified by the correlation coefficient ПҒ(p) between the target and the surrogate:
Var(ert | pt = p) = Пғ2
r(p) В·
 1 вҲ’ПҒ(p)2
,
where ПҒ(p) := Corr(rt, St(p) | pt = p). Thus, a surrogate with correlation ПҒ = 0.8 reduces the
variance to (1 вҲ’0.64) = 0.36 times the original, or equivalently, reduces the standard deviation by
a factor of 0.6.
G.2.2
Proof Roadmap for Theorem 8
The proof of Theorem 8 keeps the structure of the no-guidance baseline analysis, but with a key
modification: the estimation error вҲҶt
I is now bounded using the surrogate-assisted OLS estimator
with reduced variance Varorc instead of Пғ2
d. The main steps are:
1. Following Equation (37) in Appendix E.1, decompose the total regret into periodic differences
using hybrid policies that switch from estimated to true parameters at each block boundary.
2. The demand error вҲҶt = dt вҲ’dПҖ,k decomposes into estimation error вҲҶt
I, drift error вҲҶt
II, and
perturbation error вҲҶt
III, as in Equation (38).
3. Apply Lemma 19 (Self-Normalized Concentration with Pseudo-Observations) to bound the
parameter error.
This replaces the standard OLS bound (which scales with Пғ2
d) with a
variance-reduced bound scaling with Varorc:
E[вҲҘЛҶBkn+1 вҲ’BвҲҘ2
F ] вүІVarorc
вҲҡ
kn
+ (MLAkn,N)2.
4. Using Lipschitz continuity of the fluid solution (Lemma 5) and second-order growth conditions
(Lemma 6), translate parameter error to decision error, and sum over all k = 1, . . . , T/n
periods to obtain the final regret bound.
The complete technical details, including the handling of kernel-weighted covariance estimation and
centering mismatch, appear in the preceding subsections of Appendix G.1.
58
G.2.3
Practical Insights
Three practical observations emerge from this auxiliary guidance design:
1. Correlation matters more than accuracy. A surrogate with high correlation but mod-
erate bias can be more valuable than a low-correlation, low-bias predictor, as the Schur
complement formula (5) precisely quantifies.
2. Sufficient offline data is needed. Realizing the full variance reduction requires a large
enough offline dataset (N вүіT 1/2) so that the empirical MLA error does not dominate the
oracle term.
3. Only correlation is required, not consistency. Unlike methods that require the surro-
gate to be a consistent estimator of the true demand function, our approach only requires
correlation, making it robust to distributional shifts, feature drift, and model misspecification.
H
Proofs for Surrogate-Assisted Informed Pricing
This section proves Theorem 9, which studies the regime where a certified anchor and a surrogate
signal are both available. The resulting policy stacks two complementary devices: (1) anchored
regression from Appendix F, which turns a good anchor into logarithmic regret, and (2) variance-
reduced pseudo-observations from Appendix G, which shrink the constant from Пғ2 to Пғ2
eff < Пғ2.
The result is O((Пғ2 + Пғ2
eff) log T + (Пө0)2T), where Пғ2
eff = Пғ2 вҲ’ОЈdSОЈвҲ’1
S ОЈSd is the Schur complement
(effective variance after control variate adjustment).
The two costs separate: stochastic noise
(scaling with full variance Пғ2) versus parameter estimation error (scaling with reduced variance
Пғ2
eff). This separation reveals which part of regret benefits from surrogate data and which part is
fundamental.
We now prove Theorem 9. The proof combines the anchored regression framework from the
direct guidance appendix (Appendix F) with the variance-reduced pseudo-observations from
the auxiliary guidance appendix (Appendix G), achieving a regret bound that benefits from both
the faster convergence rate of direct guidance and the reduced constant of auxiliary guidance.
H.1
Proof of Theorem 9
Proof Roadmap
We establish the regret bound through the following steps:
1. Surrogate-Adjusted anchored regression Estimator: Construct an estimator ЛҶBt that
minimizes the anchored least squares objective using variance-reduced pseudo-observations
Лңds.
2. Parameter Error Decomposition: Decompose the estimation error вҲҘЛҶBt вҲ’BвҲҘF into three
terms: (I) Effective Variance (scaling with Пғeff), (II) Misspecification Bias (scaling with Пө0),
and (III) MLA Estimation Error (negligible with sufficient offline data).
3. Convergence Analysis: Prove that under the direct guidance setting (where prices concen-
trate around p0), the information matrix grows linearly (Jt вҲјt), leading to an O(Пғ2
eff/t+(Пө0)2)
rate for the squared parameter error.
4. Single-Step Regret Bound with Separated Costs: Decompose the single-step regret into
Intrinsic Cost (due to stochastic constraints, scaling with full variance Пғ2) and Learning
59
Cost (due to parameter error, scaling with reduced variance Пғ2
eff). The former is unavoidable
even with perfect estimates; the latter benefits from surrogate data.
5. Final Aggregation: Sum the single-step differences to obtain the logarithmic regret bound
with structure (О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)(Пғ2 + Пғ2
eff).
H.1.1
Step 1: The Surrogate-Adjusted anchored regression Estimator
Let (p0, d0) be the informed prior, satisfying вҲҘd0 вҲ’f(p0)вҲҘ2 вүӨПө0.
Let Лңds denote the pseudo-
observation at time s, constructed using the surrogate control variate as in Appendix G:
Лңds = ds вҲ’ЛҶhвҠӨ(poff вҲ’ps),
(66)
where ЛҶh is the estimated MLA coefficient. The effective noise Оҫs = ЛңdsвҲ’E
h
Лңds|psi
then has variance
bounded by Пғ2
eff.
We define the Surrogate-Adjusted anchored regression Estimator ЛҶBt as the solution to:
min
B
tвҲ’1
X
s=1
вҲҘЛңds вҲ’(d0 + B(ps вҲ’p0))вҲҘ2.
(67)
The closed-form solution is given by:
ЛҶBt =
 tвҲ’1
X
s=1
(ps вҲ’p0)(ps вҲ’p0)вҠӨ
!вҖ  tвҲ’1
X
s=1
( Лңds вҲ’d0)(ps вҲ’p0)вҠӨ.
(68)
Define the centered variables xs = ps вҲ’p0 and let Vt = PtвҲ’1
s=1 xs(xs)вҠӨbe the design matrix.
H.1.2
Step 2: Parameter Error Decomposition
We analyze ЛҶBt вҲ’B. Substituting ds = Оұ + Bps + Пөs and f(p0) = Оұ + Bp0:
Лңds вҲ’d0 = (ds + CVs) вҲ’d0
= (Оұ + Bps + Пөs + CVs) вҲ’(f(p0) + Оҙbias)
= B(ps вҲ’p0) + (Пөs + CVs) вҲ’Оҙbias,
(69)
where Оҙbias = d0 вҲ’f(p0) satisfies вҲҘОҙbiasвҲҘ2 вүӨПө0, and CVs = вҲ’ЛҶhвҠӨ(poff вҲ’ps) is the control variate
term. Let Оҫs represent the effective noise after variance reduction. The error decomposes as:
ЛҶBt вҲ’B = V вҖ 
t
tвҲ’1
X
s=1
Оҫs(xs)вҠӨ
|
{z
}
(I) Variance
вҲ’V вҖ 
t
tвҲ’1
X
s=1
Оҙbias(xs)вҠӨ
|
{z
}
(II) Bias
+Remt,
(70)
where Remt accounts for the estimation error of the control variate coefficient ЛҶh and satisfies
вҲҘRemtвҲҘF вүІMLAt,N. The squared error contribution from this term is вҲҘRemtвҲҘ2
F вүІMLA2
t,N вүҲ
n2
t + n2
N .
60
Term (I): Variance from Effective Noise.
Regret is driven by the prediction error вҲҘвҲҶt
varвҲҘ2
2 =
вҲҘ( ЛҶBt вҲ’B)(pt вҲ’p0)вҲҘ2
2 (excluding bias). As in Appendix F, we analyze two regimes:
1. Distal Regime (вҲҘpвӢҶвҲ’p0вҲҘ> Оҙ): О»min(Vt) вҲјt, so вҲҘЛҶBt вҲ’BвҲҘ2
F = O(Пғ2
eff/t). The squared
prediction error is O(Пғ2
eff/t).
2. Local Regime (pвӢҶвүҲp0): О»min(Vt) вҲјlog t (due to tвҲ’1/2 perturbation), so вҲҘЛҶBt вҲ’BвҲҘ2
F =
O(Пғ2
eff/ log t). However, prediction is at pt вүҲp0 with displacement вҲјtвҲ’1/2, so вҲҘpt вҲ’p0вҲҘ2 вҲј
1/t. The product yields вҲҘвҲҶt
varвҲҘ2
2 = o(Пғ2
eff/t).
Thus, in all cases, the variance term contribution is bounded by:
E

вҲҘ(I)вҲҘ2
F

вүӨC1
Пғ2
eff log t
t
.
(71)
Term (II): Bias from Anchor Misspecification.
This term represents the persistent bias due
to error in the candidate certified anchor. Following the derivation in Appendix F (Eq (61)), since
the anchor bias is constant and Vt grows linearly, the bias term in the estimator does not vanish in
the worst case (as the regression line is pinned to a biased point). Specifically, for the prediction
error вҲҶt which matters for regret, we have:
E

вҲҘвҲҶt
IвҲҘ2
2

вүӨCvarПғ2
eff
t
+ Cbias(Пө0)2 + CMLAMLA2
t,N,
(72)
where вҲҶt
I is the demand estimation error due to parameters.
H.1.3
Step 3: Single-Step Regret Analysis
We use the regret decomposition from Appendix E:
RegretT  ПҖ

=
T
X
t=1
E

RT (Hybridt, FT ) вҲ’RT (Hybridt+1, FT )

.
(73)
For each step, we apply the Three-Case Analysis (Case I: large demands, Case II: small demands,
Case III: mixed).
Recap of Three-Case Framework.
We reuse the boundary attraction analysis from Appendix
D (Cases I/II/III based on demand magnitude relative to the rounding threshold). Case I uses
concentration inequalities for large demands, Case II bounds the rounding cost for small de-
mands, and Case III handles mixed regimes. The key difference is that the parameter error bound
E

вҲҘвҲҶt
IвҲҘ2
2

вүӨO(Пғ2
eff/t+(Пө0)2) (from anchored regression with variance-reduced pseudo-observations)
replaces the no-info bound O(1/
вҲҡ
k), yielding logarithmic aggregation PT
t=1 O(1/t) = O(log T) in-
stead of O(
вҲҡ
T).
The single-step regret difference involves terms from both intrinsic noise and estimation error.
From Appendix F (Eq. (65)), adapted for the surrogate setting:
E [Difft] вүӨCint(О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)Пғ2
T вҲ’t + 1
|
{z
}
intrinsic cost
+ Clearn(О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)
t
E

вҲҘвҲҶt
IвҲҘ2
2

|
{z
}
learning cost
+Cbias(Пө0)2 + CmlaMLA2
t,N.
(74)
61
Separating Intrinsic from Learning Cost.
This decomposition identifies which part of regret
benefits from surrogate data:
вҖў intrinsic cost O(Пғ2/(T вҲ’t)): Arises from Case I analysis (constraint violation probability
under true stochastic dynamics). This term is fundamentalвҖ”even with perfect parameter
knowledge ( ЛҶB = B), stochastic demand realizations Пөt cause occasional capacity violations
when demands are large. boundary attraction mitigates this via the safety buffer О¶(T вҲ’t +
1)вҲ’1/2, but the underlying variance Пғ2 reflects the true market volatility, which surrogate
data cannot reduce. This term contributes O((О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)Пғ2 log T) to total regret.
вҖў learning cost O((О¶2 +вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)В·вҲҘвҲҶt
IвҲҘ2
2/t): Arises from parameter estimation errorвҖ”using ЛҶB
instead of the true B. This is where surrogate data helps. Substituting the parameter error
bound E

вҲҘвҲҶt
IвҲҘ2
2

вүӨO(Пғ2
eff/t+(Пө0)2), the learning term scales with (О¶2+вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)(Пғ2
eff/t+(Пө0)2).
The effective variance Пғ2
eff = Пғ2вҲ’ОЈdSОЈвҲ’1
S ОЈSd < Пғ2 reflects the variance reduction from control
variates: stronger correlation between true and surrogate demand yields a larger reduction.
This term contributes O((О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)Пғ2
eff log T) to total regret.
H.1.4
Step 4: Final Aggregation
Summing the single-step bounds over t = 1, . . . , T:
RegretT  ПҖ

вүӨ
T
X
t=1
Cint(О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)Пғ2
T вҲ’t + 1
|
{z
}
intrinsic cost
+
T
X
t=1
Clearn(О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)Пғ2
eff
t
|
{z
}
learning cost
+
T
X
t=1
Cbias(Пө0)2 +
T
X
t=1
MLA2
t,N
= O
 (О¶2 + вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)(Пғ2 + Пғ2
eff) log T + (Пө0)2T

+ O

n2 log T + n2T
N

.
(75)
where we used PT
t=1 MLA2
t,N вүҚPT
t=1(n2
t + n2
N ) вүҚn2 log T + n2T
N .
Interpretation of Пғ2 + Пғ2
eff Structure.
The final regret bound decomposes into two additive
components with distinct origins:
1. intrinsic cost: O((О¶2+вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)Пғ2 log T) вҖ” the unavoidable cost from stochastic constraints.
Even with perfect parameter estimates, random demand fluctuations cause constraint viola-
tions. boundary attraction (via threshold О¶) and problem conditioning (вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2) control the
magnitude, but the variance Пғ2 is inherent to the market. Surrogate data cannot reduce this
term.
2. learning cost: O((О¶2 +вҲҘBвҲ’1вҲҘ2)Пғ2
eff log T) вҖ” the cost from parameter estimation error. This
term scales with the effective variance Пғ2
eff = Пғ2 вҲ’ОЈdSОЈвҲ’1
S ОЈSd (Schur complement). Surrogate
data does reduce this term. The reduction factor (Пғ2 вҲ’Пғ2
eff)/Пғ2 = ОЈdSОЈвҲ’1
S ОЈSd/Пғ2 quantifies
the value of surrogate dataвҖ”larger when the correlation between true and surrogate markets
is stronger.
Key Insight: If Пғ2
eff вүӘПғ2 (strong correlation between markets), the learning cost dominates the
improvable part of regret, and surrogate data provides substantial benefit by reducing that compo-
nent. Conversely, if Пғ2
eff вүҲПғ2 (weak correlation), auxiliary guidance offers negligible improvement.
This result demonstrates the advantage of auxiliary guidance layered on top of direct guidance:
while the intrinsic cost remains proportional to the full noise variance Пғ2, the learning cost scales
62
with the effective variance Пғ2
eff < Пғ2. The improved leading coefficient of the logarithmic regret
term quantifies the value of offline surrogate data.1
H.1.5
Step 5: Phase Transition Logic
The algorithm (Estimate-then-Select) chooses between the stacked direct guidance+auxiliary guid-
ance strategy and the auxiliary-only fallback by comparing their expected bounds.
вҖў Strategy 1 (auxiliary guidance only): From Theorem 8, Regret вүӨCsurr(Пғeff
вҲҡ
T +n log T +
nT/N).
вҖў Strategy 2 (auxiliary guidance + direct guidance): Regret вүӨCinf(Пғ2
eff log T + (Пө0)2T).
The algorithm selects Strategy 2 when (Пө0)2T вүӨПғeff
вҲҡ
T, and Strategy 1 otherwise.
Phase Transition Tradeoff.
The choice between strategies reflects the exploration-exploitation
tradeoff. Strategy 1 (auxiliary guidance only) achieves O(Пғeff
вҲҡ
T) regretвҖ”a slower rate, but
robust to anchor error since it does not rely on (p0, d0). Strategy 2 (auxiliary guidance + direct
guidance) achieves O(Пғ2
eff log T + (Пө0)2T)вҖ”a faster rate when Пө0 is small, but vulnerable if the
candidate certified anchor is inaccurate (large Пө0 causes linear regret (Пө0)2T). The algorithm selects
Strategy 2 precisely when the candidate certified anchor is accurate enough: (Пө0)2T вүӨПғeff
вҲҡ
T, i.e.,
Пө0 вүӨT вҲ’1/4Пғ1/2
eff .
This yields the final bound:
RegretT  ПҖ

= O

min
n
Пғeff
вҲҡ
T, (Пө0)2T + Пғ2
eff log T
o
,
(76)
where we suppress the MLA terms, assuming sufficient offline data.
This completes the proof.
I
Technical Lemmas
This section collects the technical lemmas used in the main regret proofs. The lemmas fall into
two groups: (1) Surrogate-assisted learning (Lemmas 17вҖ“21), establishing variance reduction via
control variates, and (2) No-information learning (Lemma 14), verifying the second-order growth
condition for constrained optimization.
Notation for Covariance Terms.
Throughout this section, we use the following notation:
вҖў ОЈS = surrogate covariance matrix (estimable from offline data alone)
вҖў ОЈdS = cross-covariance between true demand d and surrogate S
вҖў Пғ2
eff = Schur complement Пғ2вҲ’ОЈdSОЈвҲ’1
S ОЈSd (effective variance after control variate adjustment)
The Schur complement Пғ2
eff вүӨПғ2 quantifies the residual variance after projecting out the predictable
component captured by the surrogate.
1This result reflects three contributions: (1) boundary attraction enables logarithmic regret under capacity con-
straints without nondegeneracy assumptions, (2) surrogate variance reduction via control variates improves the con-
stant in the regret bound from Пғ2 to Пғ2
eff < Пғ2, and (3) the direct-guidance phase transition balances exploration and
exploitation by selecting between strategies based on anchor quality Пө0 relative to T вҲ’1/4.
63
I.1
Lemmas for Surrogate-Assisted Learning
I.1.1
Proof of Lemma 17
Goal.
Show that the empirical surrogate covariance matrix bОЈoff
S
concentrates around the true
covariance ОЈS.
Intuition.
The residuals Si вҲ’mвӢҶ(pi) are i.i.d. sub-Gaussian vectors, so their sample covariance
concentrates around ОЈS at rate
p
n/NвҖ”the standard dimension-dependent rate for matrix-valued
random variables. Because ОЈS depends only on the surrogate, it can be estimated from offline data
alone, without online interaction.
Proof.
Under the parametric assumption, the residuals Si вҲ’mвӢҶ(pi) are i.i.d. sub-Gaussian vec-
tors with covariance ОЈS. Standard concentration results for the sample covariance matrix (e.g.,
Wainwright 2019, Theorem 6.5) state that with probability at least 1 вҲ’Оҙ:
вҲҘbОЈoff
S вҲ’ОЈSвҲҘ2 вүӨC
r
n + log(1/Оҙ)
N
,
provided N вүіn.
I.1.2
Proof of Lemma 18
Goal.
Bound the error in estimating the MLA coefficient О“вҲ—and the centering mean mвӢҶ(p) under
the parametric assumption.
Why MLA (Mean-Lipschitz-Adapted) Regression?
The optimal control variate weight
О“вҲ—(p) = ОЈdS(p)ОЈS(p)вҲ’1 determines how to transport offline surrogate observations to online prices.
When О“вҲ—varies with p, learning it requires nonparametric regression. Under the parametric as-
sumption, however, the covariance is constant across the price space, so О“вҲ—does not depend on p,
and the learning problem reduces to finite-dimensional regression. MLA adapts to this structure:
it recovers standard Ridge Regression when covariance is constant, and adjusts locally otherwise.
The constant-covariance case is analyzed here for tight bounds.
Proof Strategy.
Kernel Ridge Regression with a Finite-Rank Kernel (e.g., linear or polyno-
mial) is used, which amounts to regularized least squares in the finite-dimensional feature space
induced by the kernel.
For the coefficient bО“t, computed from t online samples, we apply standard concentration for
regularized linear regression with sub-Gaussian noise (e.g., Wainwright 2019, Theorem 2.2). Let
deff denote the effective dimension of the parameter matrix (e.g., n2 for a linear kernel). With
probability at least 1 вҲ’Оҙ/2:
вҲҘbО“t вҲ’О“вҲ—вҲҘF вүӨC1Пғ
r
deff + log(2/Оҙ)
t
.
For the centering mean ВҜmN(p), estimated from N offline samples, the finite-rank kernel assump-
tion makes mвӢҶ(p) linear in the feature map, so prediction error reduces to parameter estimation
error. With probability at least 1 вҲ’Оҙ/2:
вҲҘВҜmN(p) вҲ’mвӢҶ(p)вҲҘ2 вүӨC2Пғ
r
deff + log(2/Оҙ)
N
.
64
A union bound over these two events gives:
вҲҘbО“t вҲ’О“вҲ—вҲҘF + вҲҘВҜmN(p) вҲ’mвӢҶ(p)вҲҘ2 вүӨCMLA
 r
deff + log(1/Оҙ)
t
+
r
deff + log(1/Оҙ)
N
!
= MLAt,N(Оҙ).
I.1.3
Proof of Lemma 19
Goal.
Establish concentration for parameter estimation in the augmented regression that com-
bines online observations with surrogate-based pseudo-observations. The effective noise variance is
Пғ2
eff (the Schur complement), rather than the raw variance Пғ2.
Control Variates Reduce Variance to the Schur Complement.
Consider the joint co-
variance matrix
 Пғ2
ОЈdS
ОЈSd
ОЈS

of true demand d and surrogate S. The optimal linear predictor of
d given S is О“вҲ—S + bias with О“вҲ—= ОЈdSОЈвҲ’1
S , and its residual variance is the Schur complement:
Пғ2
eff = Пғ2 вҲ’ОЈdSОЈвҲ’1
S ОЈSd вүӨПғ2, with equality when d and S are uncorrelated. The gap Пғ2 вҲ’Пғ2
eff mea-
sures the variance explained by the surrogateвҖ”the component projected out. Pseudo-observations
constructed from the surrogate therefore inherit this reduced variance Пғ2
eff, accelerating parameter
estimation. This formalizes the control variate idea: correlated auxiliary observations reduce noise
in the quantity of interest.
Proof Strategy.
The anytime self-normalized martingale bound of Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011)
is applied to the augmented regression problem. Define the augmented noise sequence {Оҫs}t
s=1 where
Оҫs = ds
j вҲ’(ОёвҲ—)вҠӨzs for online observations, and ОҫsвҖІ = Лңd(i)
off,j вҲ’(ОёвҲ—)вҠӨЛңz(i)
off for pseudo-observations.
Variance Reduction via Control Variates.
Pseudo-observations have effective variance Пғ2
eff =
Пғ2 вҲ’ОЈdSОЈвҲ’1
S ОЈSd, the Schur complement of the joint covariance matrix, as follows from the control
variate construction:
Var[ Лңd(i)
off,j] = Var[d(i)
off,j] вҲ’Var[(О“вҲ—
j)вҠӨ(S(zi, p(i)
off) вҲ’mвӢҶ(p(i)
off))] = Пғ2
eff,
where О“вҲ—
j is the j-th row of О“вҲ—.
Using the empirical coefficient bО“t in place of the oracle О“вҲ—introduces a bias proportional to
вҲҘbО“t вҲ’О“вҲ—вҲҘF .
Applying the result of Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011) to the augmented design matrix ЛңP t yields
вҲҘЛҶBt вҲ’BвҲҘF вүӨCSN
s
Пғ2
effn log(nt/Оҙ)
О»min( ЛңP t)
+ CMLAвҲҘbО“t вҲ’О“вҲ—вҲҘF ,
where CSN is a universal constant.
I.1.4
Proof of Lemma 21
Under the quasi-uniform offline design with support [L, U]n, the offline prices satisfy вҲҘp(i)
offвҲҘ2 вүӨвҲҡnU
for all i вҲҲ[noff]. The centering mismatch arises from using ЛҶht instead of hвҲ—in the pseudo-observation
construction:
Лңd(i)
off,j вҲ’(d(i)
off,j вҲ’(hвҲ—)вҠӨ(p(i)
off вҲ’pt)) = (hвҲ—вҲ’ЛҶht)вҠӨ(p(i)
off вҲ’pt).
65
Taking expectation over the offline distribution and using Cauchy-Schwarz:
E
h
вҲҘЛңd(i)
off,j вҲ’(d(i)
off,j вҲ’(hвҲ—)вҠӨ(p(i)
off вҲ’pt))вҲҘ2
2
i
= E
h
[(hвҲ—вҲ’ЛҶht)вҠӨ(p(i)
off вҲ’pt)]2i
.
By Cauchy-Schwarz and the boundedness of the price space:
E
h
[(hвҲ—вҲ’ЛҶht)вҠӨ(p(i)
off вҲ’pt)]2i
вүӨвҲҘЛҶht вҲ’hвҲ—вҲҘ2
2E
h
вҲҘp(i)
off вҲ’ptвҲҘ2
2
i
.
Since вҲҘp(i)
off вҲ’ptвҲҘ2 вүӨ2вҲҡn(U вҲ’L) for all i (as both lie in [L, U]n), we have
E
h
вҲҘЛңd(i)
off,j вҲ’(d(i)
off,j вҲ’(hвҲ—)вҠӨ(p(i)
off вҲ’pt))вҲҘ2
2
i
вүӨCcenterвҲҘЛҶht вҲ’hвҲ—вҲҘ2
2(U вҲ’L)2,
where Ccenter is a constant depending on n. The centering mismatch is thus controlled by the MLA
coefficient error from Lemma 18.
I.2
Lemmas for No Information Setting
I.2.1
Proof of Lemma 14
Goal.
Verify the second-order growth condition required by Lemma 13 to translate parameter
estimation error into solution error: the revenue function r(d) is strongly concave near the optimum
dПҖ,t, with curvature governed by the symmetric Hessian BвҲ’1 + BвҲ’вҠӨ.
Proof Strategy.
Combine Taylor expansion with first-order optimality.
First, expand r(d)
around dПҖ,t to second order. Second, use the first-order condition: вҲҮr(dПҖ,t) is orthogonal to feasible
directions, so the linear term drops out. Third, bound the quadratic term using the symmetric
Hessian BвҲ’1+BвҲ’вҠӨ. The result is r(dПҖ,t)вҲ’r(d) вүҘОәвҲҘdвҲ’dПҖ,tвҲҘ2
2 with Оә = вҲ’О»max(BвҲ’1+BвҲ’вҠӨ)/2 > 0.
This curvature parameter Оә enters Lemma 13, controlling how parameter errors propagate to solu-
tion errors.
Proof.
Write r(d) = dвҠӨBвҲ’1(d вҲ’Оұ). Since B is negative definite (Assumption 2), so is BвҲ’1,
and the symmetric Hessian BвҲ’1 + BвҲ’вҠӨis negative definite. For the optimal solution dПҖ,t, any
feasible direction d вҲ’dПҖ,t satisfies (d вҲ’dПҖ,t)вҠӨвҲҮr(dПҖ,t) вүӨ0 by first-order optimality (Boyd and
Vandenberghe 2004).
Taylor expansion around dПҖ,t gives:
r(d) = r(dПҖ,t) + (d вҲ’dПҖ,t)вҠӨвҲҮr(dПҖ,t) + 1
2(d вҲ’dПҖ,t)вҠӨ(BвҲ’1 + BвҲ’вҠӨ)(d вҲ’dПҖ,t).
As a result, we have
r(d) вүӨr(dПҖ,t) + 1
2(d вҲ’dПҖ,t)вҠӨ(BвҲ’1 + BвҲ’вҠӨ)(d вҲ’dПҖ,t)
вүӨr(dПҖ,t) + 1
2О»max(BвҲ’1 + BвҲ’вҠӨ)
d вҲ’dПҖ,t2
2
= r(dПҖ,t) вҲ’Оә
d вҲ’dПҖ,t2
2 ,
where Оә := вҲ’О»max(BвҲ’1 + BвҲ’вҠӨ)/2 > 0. This is exactly the second-order growth condition required
by Lemma 13.
66
