Completeness of Unbounded Best-First Minimax and Descent Minimax
Quentin Cohen-Solal
LAMSADE, Universit´e Paris-Dauphine, PSL, CNRS, Paris, France
quentin.cohen-solal@dauphine.psl.eu
Abstract
In this article, we focus on search algorithms for
two-player perfect information games, whose ob-
jective is to determine the best possible strategy,
and ideally a winning strategy.
Unfortunately, some search algorithms for games
in the literature are not able to always determine a
winning strategy, even with an infinite search time.
This is the case, for example, of the following al-
gorithms: Unbounded Best-First Minimax and De-
scent Minimax, which are core algorithms in state-
of-the-art knowledge-free reinforcement learning.
They were then improved with the so-called com-
pletion technique.
However, whether this tech-
nique sufficiently improves these algorithms to al-
low them to always determine a winning strategy
remained an open question until now.
To answer this question, we generalize the two al-
gorithms (their versions using the completion tech-
nique), and we show that any algorithm of this class
of algorithms computes the best strategy.
Finally, we experimentally show that the comple-
tion technique improves winning performance.
1
Introduction
Unbounded Best-First Minimax [Korf and Chickering, 1996;
Cohen-Solal and Cazenave, 2020; Cohen-Solal, 2019] is an
old game tree search algorithm which is rarely used. Unlike
classic Minimax, this algorithm performs a search at an un-
bounded depth, making it possible to explore the game tree
non-uniformly.
Thus, it can anticipate many future turns
in the most promising parts of the game tree.
Most re-
cently, it has been successfully applied in the context of re-
inforcement learning without knowledge [Cohen-Solal and
Cazenave, 2023b; Cohen-Solal, 2020]. More precisely, for
many games, at least combined with a search algorithm ded-
icated to reinforcement learning, named Descent Minimax,
Unbounded Minimax gives much better results than the old
state of the art of reinforcement learning without knowl-
edge (i.e.
the AlphaZero algorithm [Silver et al., 2018],
based on Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) [Coulom, 2006;
Browne et al., 2012], another search algorithm, which is
stochastic).
A thorough experimental study showed that
Unbounded Minimax was the best-performing search algo-
rithm [Cohen-Solal, 2025].
The Descent (Minimax) algorithm is a modification of Un-
bounded Best-first Minimax that builds the search tree focus-
ing more on depth-first exploration in order to more effec-
tively propagate endgame information during learning.
In their basic versions, Unbounded Minimax and Descent
are not complete in certain contexts such as reinforcement
learning, that is to say they do not allow one to compute an
equilibrium point of the complete game tree (i.e. a winning
strategy for each player), even in infinite time [Cohen-Solal,
2020]. For example, the basic algorithms, not using the fact
that certain states are resolved, will always choose to play
during the exploration a resolved state rather than an unre-
solved state whose evaluation is worse than the resolved state
(whereas the evaluation of an unresolved state is only an esti-
mate, so the unresolved state may be better). This blocks the
exploration and prevents, when this scenario occurs, calcu-
lating the minimax value and therefore determining the best
action to play.
Being able to determine the best strategy is crucial. In a
state where one has the advantage, determining the best strat-
egy guarantees us to keep this advantage until the end of the
game and therefore to win the match. In a state where the op-
ponent has the advantage, determining the best strategy can
make it possible to exploit an error in the opponent’s strategy
to take advantage and thus win the game (if the latter has not
determined the best strategy).
Although it is usually impractical to determine the best
strategy in the early game, it is possible to do so in the late
game. The objective of the match is therefore to play as well
as possible from the start, so as to reach a sufficiently favor-
able state in the late game where a winning strategy can be
determined.
In [Cohen-Solal, 2020], an improvement of Descent and
Unbounded Minimax, which is called completion, has been
proposed. However, it was not clear whether this modifica-
tion made both algorithms complete, and more generally if
using Completion is actually useful in practice
Thus, we show in this article that completion makes the
two algorithms complete in finite time. More precisely, on
the one hand, we identify a whole class of search algorithms,
grouping Unbounded Best-First Minimax and Descent. On
arXiv:2603.24572v1  [cs.AI]  25 Mar 2026
the other hand, we show that each algorithm belonging to this
class always computes, for any two-player game with perfect
information, one of its best strategies (in finite time). Finally,
we show that the use of completion actually and significantly
improves the practical winning performance of Unbounded
Minimax, showing that it is important to use Completion.
We start by making, in the next section, a quick survey
about search algorithms for two-player perfect-information
games. In Section 3, we formally define what we call two-
player games with perfect information and the fact that a
search algorithm is complete (that is, it calculates the best
strategy). In particular, we explain the notations used. In Sec-
tion 4, we present the two algorithms: Unbounded Best-First
Minimax and Descent using the completion technique. Then,
in Section 5, we generalize these two algorithms within a par-
ticular class of search algorithms, that we call Unbounded
Minimax-based algorithms. Moreover, in Section 6, we show
that Unbounded Minimax-based algorithms are all complete:
they effectively compute the best strategy (proofs are in Ap-
pendix). Finally, in Section 7, we experimentally show that
the completion technique improves winning performance for
Unbounded Best-First Minimax.
2
Related Work
Artificial Intelligence in Games [Millington and Funge, 2018;
Bouzy et al., 2020; Mandziuk, 2010; Allis and others, 1994;
Yannakakis and Togelius, 2018; Russell and Norvig, 2016]
has a long research history.
The basic search algorithm in two-player perfect infor-
mation games is minimax [Morgenstern and Von Neumann,
1953]. It builds a search tree whose nodes are states of the
game linked to each other when they are reachable by an ac-
tion. There are max nodes, i.e. states where the first player
plays and seeks to maximize his gain and min nodes, i.e.
states where the second player plays and seeks to minimize
the gain of the first player (we place ourselves in the context
of zero-sum games). The search is carried out up to a depth
p fixed in advance. The minimax algorithm then recursively
computes the approximate minimax value associated with the
search tree of depth p for each state in that tree. The value
of a non-terminal leaf state is given by an evaluation function
which provides an indication on how promising this state is or
not, in order to compare the states with each other. The value
of a terminal leaf state is its gain (usually 1 if the first player
wins, 0 for a draw and −1 if the first player loses; the gain can
also be the difference of player scores). The value of a max
state is the maximum of the value of its child states and the
value of a min state is the minimum of the value of its child
states. Note that the exact minimax value corresponds to the
“infinite” depth, i.e. when all the descendants of all the states
of the tree are in the search tree. In that case, each leaf is a ter-
minal state. Therefore, an evaluation function gives a better
level of play when it constitutes a good approximation of the
exact minimax value of states. Once the search tree has been
constructed from a game state, the best action in this state is
the one that leads to the child state with the best approximate
minimax value (the maximum value child for a max state and
the minimum value child for a min state).
Many improvements and variants of minimax have been
proposed, in particular to reduce the number of states to be
analyzed (notably by reducing the branching factor), in order
to speed up the calculation of the best action (which is expo-
nential with respect to the depth of the search). The standard
improvement is the Alpha-Beta algorithm [Knuth and Moore,
1975; Baudet, 1978; Fink, 1982; Pearl, 1982] which performs
exact pruning during the minimax search. It reduces the num-
ber of states to be evaluated without changing the strategy
determined by the search. More precisely, it infers that some
parts of the search tree do not influence the minimax value of
the root of the search tree and are therefore unnecessary for
the calculation of the best strategy.
Among the variants of minimax, there is the family of
fixed-depth best-first minimax [Plaat et al., 1996; Plaat et al.,
2017], and in particular the MTD(f) algorithm, which itera-
tively performs alpha-beta searches by assuming that the min-
imax value is in a specific interval in order to perform strong
pruning and thus obtain an inexpensive search. This interval
is modified at each iteration, in order to finally find the mini-
max value at depth p.
Another variant is the Principal Variation Search algo-
rithm [Pearl, 1980a; Pearl, 1980b; Qi et al., 2020] which
checks that the states are well ordered by their value, in par-
ticular the state of best value. The verification is less expen-
sive than applying the alpha-beta algorithm. If the verification
fails, a standard alpha-beta search is used to determine the
minimax value. Different heuristics were also used to modify
the search: for example the null move heuristic [Donninger,
1993] and the history heuristic [Schaeffer, 1983], as well as
move ordering technique [Fink, 1982], which influences the
pruning performance of alpha-beta. Moreover, there is also
the quiescence search [Beal, 1990] which searches until the
leaves of the tree are "quiet".
There are also unbounded algorithms, i.e.
with an un-
fixed depth. They make it possible to mitigate the problem
of the combinatorial explosion by building a non-uniform
game tree, which permits to explore very in depth locally and
to perform powerful but possibly temporary pruning. Proof
Number Search first explores the a priori faster-to-resolve
states. B* [Berliner, 1981] uses two ratings: an optimistic
evaluation and a pessimistic evaluation and seeks to show
that the pessimistic value of the a priori best state is bet-
ter than the optimistic values of the other states. Conspir-
acy search [McAllester, 1988; Schaeffer, 1990] consists in
exploring the states that most affect the minimax value first.
Finally, unbounded best-first minimax first explores the states
of a priori best minimax value. This algorithm requires a
good evaluation function to give good results: the better the
evaluation function is, the more powerful and useful the prun-
ings are and the better the level of play is. But conversely,
worse evaluation functions lead to an even worse level of
play than with other algorithms. For this reason, this algo-
rithm has a limited practical use, due to the lack of a learning
procedure providing a sufficiently good evaluation function
(until [Cohen-Solal, 2019]). The Descent search is a variant
of Unbounded Best-First Minimax which explores the game
tree by focusing much more on depth-first exploration. The
objective of this algorithm is not only to calculate the best
possible approximate minimax value of the root of the search
tree in limited time but also to provide better quality data for
learning.
Opposing minimax-type approaches, there is Monte Carlo
Tree Search [Browne et al., 2012; Coulom, 2006; Chaslot
et al., 2008; Gelly and Silver, 2011; Kocsis and Szepesv´ari,
2006; Kocsis et al., 2006] which replaces the minimax value
of a state by the victory statistics of the game simulations
carried out during the search passing through this state.
It uses a regret term to bias the search in order to man-
age the exploration-exploitation dilemma. Note that it has
been proven that the standard MCTS is complete in infinite
time [Kocsis and Szepesv´ari, 2006; Kocsis et al., 2006]. It
requires for this to fully explore the game tree. This is not
the case for Unbounded Minimax and Descent thanks to their
exact pruning. A variant of MCTS has been proposed which
is complete in finite time [Winands et al., 2008]. However,
this variant does not manage resolved draws (contrary to Un-
bounded Minimax and Descent with completion). In addi-
tion, there are over-estimates and under-estimates problems
because pruning from resolution biases values of states in
MCTS (see Section 4.2 of [Winands et al., 2008]). To miti-
gate this problem, they use an arbitrary parameter as a thresh-
old value and it requires that some resolved states are ex-
plored again and several times. This problem and the need to
explore a resolved state again do not appear with Unbounded
Minimax and Descent with completion.
Monte Carlo Tree Search is the search of the AlphaZero
algorithm, which has managed to reach the level of the
best human players in Go and Chess [Silver et al., 2018;
Silver et al., 2017]. At least for accessible learning dura-
tions, the Ath´enan algorithm [Cohen-Solal, 2019] based on
Unbounded Best-First Minimax and Descent Minimax gives
better performance than the AlphaZero algorithm (at least
thirty times faster) [Cohen-Solal and Cazenave, 2023b]. This
was confirmed at international tournaments: at the Computer
Olympiad, Ath´enan shattered all records, overwhelmingly
defeating all competitors, including those using AlphaZero-
based approaches. The record for gold medals in a single year
is threefold [Cohen-Solal and Cazenave, 2023a]. Since its in-
troduction in 2020, it has won 57 gold medals and currently
holds the title in 20 games [Cohen-Solal, 2020; Cohen-Solal
and Cazenave, 2021; Cohen-Solal and Cazenave, 2023a]. At
the most recent competition, it won the gold medal in 9 out
of 11 games.
Finally, there are also approaches hybridizing minimax and
Monte Carlo Tree Search [Baier and Winands, 2013; Baier
and Winands, 2015; Baier and Winands, 2018; Lanctot et al.,
2014; Lin, 2017].
Note that the labelings of states carried out by search algo-
rithms are generally stored in hash tables, called transposition
tables.
3
Perfect Two-Player Games and
Completeness
In this section, we are interested in formalizing zero-sum two-
player games with perfect information (games without hid-
den information or chance where players take turns playing).
Moreover, we detail the values used by the completion tech-
nique and present the other notations employed in this docu-
ment.
3.1
Perfect Two-Player Game
We start by defining two-player games with perfect informa-
tion:
Definition 1.
A perfect two-player game is a tuple
(S, A, j, fb) where
• (S, A) is a finite lower semilattice,
• j is a function from S to {1, 2},
• fb is a function from {s ∈S | t (s)} to {−1, 0, 1}, where
– t is a predicate such that t (s) is true if and only if
|A (s)| = 0 ;
– A (s) is the set defined by {s′ ∈S | (s, s′) ∈A},
for all s ∈S.
The set S is the set of game states. A encodes the actions
of the game: A (s) is the set of states reachable by an action
from s. The function j indicates, for each state, the number of
the player whose turn it is, i.e. the player who must play. The
predicate t (s) indicates if s is a terminal state (i.e. an end-of-
game state). Let s ∈S such that t (s) is true, the value fb (s)
is the payout for the first player in the terminal state s (the
gain for the second player is −fb (s) ; we are in the context of
zero-sum games). We have fb (s) = 1 if the first player wins,
fb (s) = 0 in the event of a draw, and fb (s) = −1 if the first
player loses.
The terminal evaluation fb is often not very informative
about the quality of a game.
A more expressive terminal
evaluation function, with values in R, can be used to favor
some games over others, which can improve the level of play
[Cohen-Solal, 2020]. We denote such functions by ft. For ex-
ample, in score games, ft(s) may be the score of the endgame
s (see [Cohen-Solal, 2020] for other terminal evaluation func-
tions). In order to guide the search, it is necessary to be able to
evaluate non-terminal states. To do this, an evaluation func-
tion from S to R, denoted by fθ(s), is used. A good evalua-
tion function fθ(s) provides for example an approximation of
the minimax value of s. Such a function fθ(s) can be deter-
mined by reinforcement learning, using ft(s) as “reinforce-
ment heuristic” [Cohen-Solal, 2020].
3.2
State Values of Completion
We now detail the foundations needed to understand the com-
pletion technique. With the completion technique, each state
s of the partial game tree constructed by the used search al-
gorithm is associated with three values. The first value, the
completion value c (s), indicates the exact minimax value of
s compared to the classic gain of the game (if it is not known,
c (s) = 0). The (exact) minimax value of a state s with re-
spect to a certain terminal evaluation function (such as the
classic game gain) is the terminal evaluation of the end-of-
game state obtained by starting from s where the players play
optimally (i.e. the first player maximizes the end-of-game
value and the second player minimizes this value ; each by
having complete knowledge of the full game tree).
The second value, the heuristic evaluation v (s), is an es-
timate of the true minimax value of s with respect to a cer-
tain reinforcement heuristic (a terminal evaluation function,
at least, more expressive than the classic gain of the game).
More precisely, the heuristic evaluation v (s) is the minimax
value of s in the partial game tree where the terminal leaves of
the tree are evaluated by the reinforcement heuristic and the
other leaves by an adaptive evaluation function (learned, for
example, by reinforcement learning, to estimate the minimax
value corresponding to the reinforcement heuristic).
Finally, the third value, the resolution value r (s), indicates
whether the state s is (weakly) resolved (case r (s) = 1) or
not (case r (s) = 0). A terminal state s is resolved (thus at
any time r (s) = 1). A non-terminal leaf s is not resolved
at the start of the algorithm (initially, r (s) = 0). Then, an
internal (i.e., non-leaf) state is resolved if its best child is a
winning resolved state for the current player or if all of its
children are resolved (c (s) is then exact).
3.3
Other notations
We describe the other notations used in this article. First,
n(s, s′) is the number of times a child state s′ is selected from
a parent state s (has no impact on the completeness) ; Sp : set
of explored states by the used search algorithm, i.e. the partial
game tree. It is in practice the keys of the transposition table
T, associating a state s with the values v (s), c (s), and r (s).
⊤: True, ⊥: False.
4
State-of-the-Art Algorithms
4.1
Unbounded Best-First Minimax with
Completion
Unbounded (Best-First) Minimax (noted more succinctly
UBFM) is an algorithm which builds a (partial) tree of the
game to decide which is the best action to play given the cur-
rent knowledge about the game (i.e. given the partial tree of
the game). The algorithm iteratively builds the partial tree of
the game by extending each time the best sequence of unre-
solved states (in a state s the first player (resp. second player)
chooses the state s′ which maximizes (resp. minimizes) the
lexicographically ordered pair (c (s) , v (s))). In other words,
it adds the child states of the principal variation of the partial
game tree deprived of resolved states. An iteration of Un-
bounded Minimax is described in Algorithm 1. This iteration
is performed (on a game state) as long as there is some search
time left (τ: search time) or until this state is resolved (and
therefore its minimax value is determined, as we will prove
later). Note that to decide the action to play after the search,
the best action is chosen (see Algorithm 3).
4.2
Descent with Completion
Descent Minimax is a variant of Unbounded Minimax. The
key difference is that it extends the best sequence of unre-
solved game states until it reaches either a terminal or a re-
solved state. As a result, it performs deterministic endgame
simulations iteratively.
In contrast, Unbounded Minimax stops its iteration as soon
as it extends a new state. It therefore extends the current best
sequence of actions by only a single action at each iteration.
Descent Minimax explores the game tree in a different or-
der, with a much stronger depth-first bias. This exploration
priority is particularly interesting from a learning perspec-
tive [Cohen-Solal, 2020]. An iteration of Descent Minimax
is described in Algorithm 2.
5
Unbounded Minimax-based algorithms
We now generalize the Descent (Minimax) and Unbounded
(Best-First) Minimax algorithms using the completion tech-
Algorithm 1 UBFM tree search algorithm with com-
pletion (see Algorithm 3 for the definitions of com-
pleted best action(s) and backup resolution(s)).
Algorithm 2 Descent Minimax tree search algorithm with
completion (see Algorithm 3 for the definitions of com-
pleted best action(s) and backup resolution(s)).
nique into a set of search algorithms, preserving its main
properties (they are minimax-like algorithms operating with-
out a depth bound). However, each algorithm in this set ex-
plores the game tree differently. More precisely, this class
of algorithms groups together all the possibilities of behav-
ior with regard to the decision to continue the exploration in
depth of the line of play being currently analyzed or to return
to the root to possibly choose a new line of play. Unbounded
Best-First Minimax always returns to the root after having
extended by only one state the line of play and Descent re-
turns to the root only when the extended line of play reaches
the end of the game. This class of algorithms also includes all
the possibilities of behavior for the order of exploration of the
different children of a state. Unbounded Best-First Minimax
and Descent always choose the best child.
We call this class of algorithms Unbounded Minimax-
based algorithms. Note that any Unbounded Minimax-based
algorithm natively uses the completion technique. Thus, this
class includes the completion versions of Descent and Un-
bounded Best-First Minimax. Recall that without the com-
pletion technique, these two algorithms are not complete and
we show in the sequel that they are complete with the com-
pletion technique.
The formalization of an iteration of a Unbounded
Minimax-based algorithm is described in Algorithm 4. This
iteration is performed (on a game state) as long as there is
some search time left (τ: search time) or until this state is
resolved (and therefore its minimax value is determined, as
we will prove later). This “abstract” iteration algorithm de-
pends on two methods which must be specified in order to
instantiate the algorithm. The method continue determines
if the algorithm continues to expand the current line of play
(i.e. to explore more deeply the estimation of the rest of the
match) or if the algorithm considers a potentially new line
of play starting from the current state of the match (i.e. po-
Algorithm
3
Definition
of
the
algorithms
com-
pleted best action(s,
A),
which computes the a priori
best child state by using completion from a set of child states
A, and backup resolution(s), which updates the resolution
of s from its child states. The methods use lexicographic
ordering.
tentially considers another estimate of the rest of the match).
This method defines the order of “deep exploration”. The
method calculate priority child(s) returns the child state of
s to be explored first. This second method defines the order
of “breadth exploration”.
A Unbounded Minimax-based algorithm builds a (partial)
tree of the game to decide which is the best action to play
given the current knowledge about the game (i.e. given the
partial tree of the game). Each state s of the partial game
tree is associated with the three completion values (see Sec-
tion 3.2), like with Unbounded Best-First Minimax and De-
scent.
A Unbounded Minimax-based algorithm iteratively builds
the partial tree of the game by extending each time a se-
quence of unresolved states (which is not necessarily the best
sequence of unresolved states contrary to what Descent and
Unbounded Best-First Minimax do). Recall that Unbounded
Best-First Minimax extends the sequence of states by a sin-
gle state, which is the best child state. In contrast, Descent
recursively extends the sequence of states by the best child
state until a terminal state is reached. More generally, a Un-
bounded Minimax-based algorithm recursively extends the
sequence of states by one of the child states, which is not
necessarily the best child state, up to a certain state, which is
not necessarily a terminal state.
6
Completeness of Unbounded
Minimax-Based Algorithms
We start by precisely formalizing what we mean by com-
pleteness in the context of a Unbounded Minimax-based al-
gorithm. For this, we define the (exact) minimax value of a
state.
Definition 2. Let S be a complete game tree.
The minimax value of a state s ∈S (compared to the ter-
minal evaluation fb) is the value M (s) recursively defined
by
M (s) =



maxs′∈A(s) M (s′)
if ¬t (s) ∧j (s) = 1
mins′∈A(s) M (s′)
if ¬t (s) ∧j (s) = 2
fb (s)
if t (s)
We thus define completeness as the ability to compute the
minimax value (in finite time).
Definition 3. A Unbounded Minimax-based algorithm is
complete if for any perfect two-player game (S, A, j, fb) and
for any state s ∈S, there exists τ ∈N+, such that applying
the algorithm on s, with τ as search time, gives r (s) = 1 and
c (s) = M (s).
We can now show that any Unbounded Minimax-based al-
gorithm is complete.
Note first that if a state is marked as resolved (i.e. r(s) =
1), its values do not change:
Lemma 4. Let ˆs be a state of a perfect two-player game G.
If r (ˆs) = 1 before an iteration of a Unbounded Minimax-
based algorithm on a certain state ˆs′ of G then after the iter-
ation, r (ˆs) and c (ˆs) have not changed.
Algorithm
4
Iteration
of
a
Unbounded
Minimax-
based
algorithm
(see
Algorithm
3
for
the
definitions
of
completed best action(s)
and
backup resolution(s)). It is based on two abstract methods:
calculate priority child(s, A, Sp, T) which must return one
of the children of s in A depending on the current search
status (i.e. Sp and T) and continue(s, Sp, T) which must
return a boolean that determines whether to continue to
explore the current line of play deeper or backtrack to the
root to potentially explore a new line of play, depending on
the current search status (i.e. Sp and T). Note: b is True if s
has just been extended.
Note now that a state s is marked as resolved (i.e. r(s) = 1)
if and only if all of its children are marked as resolved (any
child state s′ satisfies r(s′) = 1) or s is marked as winning
for the first player (c(s) = 1) or it is marked as losing for the
first player (c(s) = −1):
Lemma 5. Let (Sp, A) be a game tree built by a Unbounded
Minimax-based algorithm from a certain state. Let s ∈Sp.
We have the following properties:
• If r (s) = 1, then either |c (s)| = 1 or for all s′ ∈A (s),
r (s′) = 1 ;
• If |c (s)| = 1, then r (s) = 1 ;
• If for all s′ ∈A (s), r (s′) = 1, then r (s) = 1.
We now show that if a state s is marked as resolved (r(s) =
1) then it is resolved, i.e. its completion value is equal to its
minimax value (c (s) = M (s)):
Proposition 6. Let (Sp, A) be a game tree built by a Un-
bounded Minimax-based algorithm from a certain state and
let s ∈Sp.
If r (s) = 1, then c (s) = M (s).
In the lemma below, we show under which sufficient condi-
tions an iteration of a Unbounded Minimax-based algorithm
terminates.
Lemma 7. Let A be a Unbounded Minimax-based algorithm
and s′ be a non-terminal state of a perfect two-player game
such that r(s′) = 0.
An iteration of the algorithm A on the state s′ ends in
a state s such that either s /∈Sp before the iteration and
s ∈Sp after the iteration or r(s) = 0 before the iteration
and r(s) = 1 after the iteration.
We now show that all Unbounded Minimax-based algo-
rithm mark any game state as resolved after a finite number
of iterations:
Proposition 8. Let A be a Unbounded Minimax-based algo-
rithm, S be the set of states of a perfect two-player game, and
s ∈S.
There exists N ∈N such that after applying N times the
algorithm A on the state s, we have r (s) = 1.
From the previous Lemmas and Propositions, we con-
clude to the completeness of Unbounded Minimax-based al-
gorithms:
Theorem 9. Any Unbounded Minimax-based algorithm is
complete.
7
Experimental Comparison
We conducted an empirical evaluation of the Unbounded
Best-First Minimax algorithm with and without completion.
We will show that its use has an impact on performance and
that this impact is positive and more precisely significantly
positive, using standardized benchmarks across several two-
player games.
7.1
Experimental Protocol
We apply the experimental protocol for evaluating search al-
gorithms from the article [Cohen-Solal, 2025]. We use the
same games, the same evaluation functions, the same proce-
dures, the same computers, etc. All the details of this experi-
ment are therefore available in [Cohen-Solal, 2025].
Thus, we evaluated the two algorithms in the con-
text of the 22 deterministic, perfect-information, zero-sum
games, namely Amazons, Ataxx, Breakthrough, Brazilian
Draughts, Canadian Draughts, Clobber, Connect6, Interna-
tional Draughts, Chess, Go 9 × 9, (Outer-Open-)Gomoku,
Havannah, Hex 11 × 11, Hex 13 × 13, Hex 19 × 19, Lines of
Action, Othello 10 × 10, Othello 8 × 8, Santorini, Surakarta
and, Xiangqi, and Arimaa. They are all recurrent games at the
Computer Olympiad, the global artificial intelligence board
game competition.
For each game, six distinct sets of evaluation functions
are used, each containing approximately fifteen functions.
Evaluation functions are learned by reinforcement using the
Ath´enan algorithm. The evaluation process is repeated for
each of these six sets. During each repetition, the two algo-
rithms compete against each other (once as the first player
and once as the second) for each pair of evaluation functions
in the current set. This results in roughly 450 matches per rep-
etition, totaling about 2,700 matches per game across all six
repetitions. Each search algorithm uses 10 seconds of search
time per action (which is of the same order of magnitude as
times in competition).
Table 1: Detailed performance of Unbounded Best-First Minimax with completion against Unbounded Best-First Minimax without comple-
tion.
Amazons
Arimaa
Ataxx
Breakthrough
Brazilian
Canadian
Clobber
Connect6
International
Chess
Go 9
1% ±2%
7% ±1%
55% ±2%
-1% ±1%
2% ±0%
6% ±1%
0% ±1%
0% ±2%
4% ±0%
1% ±1%
0% ±2%
Gomoku
Havannah
Hex 11
Hex 13
Hex 19
Lines of A.
Othello 10
Othello 8
Santorini
Surakarta
Xiangqi
0% ±1%
0% ±2%
0% ±1%
0% ±1%
0% ±1%
5% ±1%
24% ±1%
28% ±1%
14% ±2%
4% ±1%
11% ±1%
All algorithms use transposition tables and the safe deci-
sion technique (the action selected to play after performing
the search by the algorithm is the most frequently selected
action at the end of the search) [Cohen-Solal, 2025].
To assess the performance of a search algorithm, match
outcomes are aggregated using the following scoring: 1 for a
win, -1 for a loss, and 0 for a draw. The final performance on
a game is the average score across all matches played by the
algorithm in that game. We report 95% confidence intervals
for these values, along with an overall average performance
across all games. In addition, we provide an unbiased global
confidence interval using stratified bootstrapping at the 95%
level.
See also Technical Details of the Appendix.
7.2
Results
We thus evaluate Unbounded Minimax without completion
against Unbounded Minimax with completion. On average
across all games, using completion improves performance.
The score with completion is 6.34% ∈[6.03%, 6.66%] and
the score without completion is −6.34%. Detailed perfor-
mances are described in Table 1. These results indicate that
Completion has a strong positive impact on the algorithm’s
behavior.
8
Conclusion
This article focuses on search algorithms for games, whose
objective is to determine the best possible strategy, and ide-
ally a winning strategy.
Although determining a winning
strategy for a game is in general impractical due to the com-
binatorial explosion, it remains an essential problem. Indeed,
in the late game, the combinatorics is reduced, which makes
it possible to determine a winning strategy. It is therefore es-
sential that a search algorithm for games be able to determine
a good approximation of a winning strategy in the early game,
and be able to determine a winning strategy in the late game.
Otherwise, an algorithm that provides a worse approximation
of a winning strategy in the early game, but which would be
able to determine a winning strategy in the late game, would
be able to regain the advantage and win the game. The de-
sired property is therefore that a search algorithm is always
able to determine a winning strategy (when it exists) if it is
given enough computation time. Such search algorithms are
called complete.
In this article, we have in particular studied the algorithms
Unbounded Best-First Minimax and Descent Minimax ex-
tended by the so-called completion technique. These two al-
gorithms are parts of Ath´enan, the state-of-the-art of game
playing and learning without knowledge in two-player games
with perfect information, being in particular the leading al-
gorithm in international game competitions, by a very wide
margin. The completion technique was proposed to improve
the two algorithms, because the latter two are not complete:
they do not always determine a winning strategy when it ex-
ists. The question then arose whether the completion tech-
nique makes the two algorithms complete. If this was not the
case, then the two algorithms would have had to be further
improved. This article answers this problem.
For that, we have generalized the two algorithms Un-
bounded Best-First Minimax and Descent using the com-
pletion technique within Unbounded Minimax-based algo-
rithms. This class of algorithms includes all the possibilities
of behavior with regard to the decision to continue the explo-
ration in depth of the current line of play or to return to the
root to possibly choose a new strategy. Unbounded Best-First
Minimax always returns to the root and Descent returns to the
root only when the line of play reaches the end of the game.
This class of algorithms also includes all the possibilities of
behavior for the order of exploration of the different children
of a state. Unbounded Best-First Minimax and Descent al-
ways choose the best child.
Then, we have proved, in a unique proof, that any Un-
bounded Minimax-based algorithm is complete, i.e. with suf-
ficient time and memory, they allow one to (weakly) solve
perfect-information two-player games and therefore to deter-
mine for these games a best strategy (a winning strategy if
any exists or otherwise a draw strategy if any exists). Thus,
Unbounded Best-First Minimax and Descent using the com-
pletion technique are effectively complete.
However, a second question arises: does this modification
actually improve practical performance or would all of this
merely be a negligible detail? Is it important to implement
this change? We have also addressed this second question
by experimentally showing that completion significantly im-
proves winning performance.
Note that some of the other Unbounded Minimax-based al-
gorithms might have practical value, at least in some specific
contexts. We already know that they can always be used to
determine winning strategies. In fact, some of these new al-
gorithms are useful, as we will see in a future article.
References
[Allis and others, 1994] Louis Victor Allis et al. Searching
for solutions in games and artificial intelligence. Ponsen
& Looijen Wageningen, 1994. 2
[Baier and Winands, 2013] Hendrik Baier and Mark HM
Winands. Monte-carlo tree search and minimax hybrids.
In Conference on Computational Intelligence in Games,
pages 1–8. IEEE, 2013. 2
[Baier and Winands, 2015] Hendrik Baier and Mark HM
Winands. Mcts-minimax hybrids. Transactions on Com-
putational Intelligence and AI in Games, 7(2):167–179,
2015. 2
[Baier and Winands, 2018] Hendrik Baier and Mark HM
Winands. Mcts-minimax hybrids with state evaluations.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 62:193–231,
2018. 2
[Baudet, 1978] G´erard M Baudet. On the branching factor of
the alpha-beta pruning algorithm. Artificial Intelligence,
10(2):173–199, 1978. 2
[Beal, 1990] Don F Beal. A generalised quiescence search
algorithm. Artificial Intelligence, 43(1):85–98, 1990. 2
[Berliner, 1981] Hans Berliner. The b* tree search algorithm:
A best-first proof procedure. In Readings in Artificial In-
telligence, pages 79–87. Elsevier, 1981. 2
[Bouzy et al., 2020] Bruno Bouzy, Tristan Cazenave, Vin-
cent Corruble, and Olivier Teytaud. Artificial intelligence
for games, 2020. 2
[Browne et al., 2012] Cameron B Browne, Edward Pow-
ley, Daniel Whitehouse, Simon M Lucas, Peter I Cowl-
ing, Philipp Rohlfshagen, Stephen Tavener, Diego Perez,
Spyridon Samothrakis, and Simon Colton. A survey of
monte carlo tree search methods. Transactions on Compu-
tational Intelligence and AI in games, 4(1):1–43, 2012. 1,
2
[Chaslot et al., 2008] Guillaume Chaslot, Sander Bakkes,
Istvan Szita, and Pieter Spronck. Monte-carlo tree search:
A new framework for game ai. In AIIDE, 2008. 2
[Cohen-Solal and Cazenave, 2020] Quentin
Cohen-Solal
and Tristan Cazenave.
Minimax strikes back.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2012.10700, 2020. 1
[Cohen-Solal and Cazenave, 2021] Quentin
Cohen-Solal
and Tristan Cazenave. Descent wins five gold medals at
the computer olympiad. ICGA Journal, 43(2):132–134,
2021. 2
[Cohen-Solal and Cazenave, 2023a] Quentin
Cohen-Solal
and Tristan Cazenave. Athenan wins sixteen gold medals
at the computer olympiad. ICGA Journal, 45(3), 2023. 2
[Cohen-Solal and Cazenave, 2023b] Quentin
Cohen-Solal
and Tristan Cazenave. Minimax strikes back. AAMAS,
2023. 1, 2
[Cohen-Solal, 2019] Quentin Cohen-Solal.
Apprendre `a
jouer aux jeux `a deux joueurs `a information parfaite sans
connaissance. 2019. 1, 2
[Cohen-Solal, 2020] Quentin Cohen-Solal. Learning to play
two-player perfect-information games without knowledge.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.01188, 2020. 1, 2, 3.1, 4.2
[Cohen-Solal, 2025] Quentin Cohen-Solal.
Study and im-
provement of search algorithms in two-players perfect in-
formation games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09639, 2025.
1, 7.1
[Coulom, 2006] R´emi Coulom.
Efficient selectivity and
backup operators in monte-carlo tree search. In Comput-
ers and Games, 5th International Conference, CG 2006,
Turin, Italy, May 29-31, 2006. Revised Papers, pages 72–
83, 2006. 1, 2
[Donninger, 1993] Christian Donninger. Null move and deep
search. ICGA Journal, 16(3):137–143, 1993. 2
[Fink, 1982] William Fink.
An enhancement to the itera-
tive, alpha-beta, minimax search procedure. ICGA Jour-
nal, 5(1):34–35, 1982. 2
[Gelly and Silver, 2011] Sylvain Gelly and David Silver.
Monte-carlo tree search and rapid action value estima-
tion in computer go. Artificial Intelligence, 175(11):1856–
1875, 2011. 2
[Knuth and Moore, 1975] Donald E Knuth and Ronald W
Moore. An analysis of alpha-beta pruning. Artificial Intel-
ligence, 6(4):293–326, 1975. 2
[Kocsis and Szepesv´ari, 2006] Levente Kocsis and Csaba
Szepesv´ari. Bandit based monte-carlo planning. In Eu-
ropean conference on machine learning, pages 282–293.
Springer, 2006. 2
[Kocsis et al., 2006] Levente Kocsis, Csaba Szepesv´ari, and
Jan Willemson. Improved monte-carlo search. Univ. Tartu,
Estonia, Tech. Rep, 1, 2006. 2
[Korf and Chickering, 1996] Richard
E
Korf
and
David Maxwell Chickering.
Best-first minimax search.
Artificial intelligence, 84(1-2):299–337, 1996. 1
[Lanctot et al., 2014] Marc Lanctot, Mark HM Winands,
Tom Pepels, and Nathan R Sturtevant. Monte carlo tree
search with heuristic evaluations using implicit minimax
backups. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.0486, 2014. 2
[Lin, 2017] Jonathan Fun Lin. Monte Carlo Tree Search and
Minimax Combination–Application of Solving Problems
in the Game of Go. PhD thesis, 2017. 2
[Mandziuk, 2010] Jacek Mandziuk.
Knowledge-free and
learning-based methods in intelligent game playing, vol-
ume 276. Springer, 2010. 2
[McAllester, 1988] David Allen McAllester.
Conspiracy
numbers for min-max search.
Artificial Intelligence,
35(3):287–310, 1988. 2
[Millington and Funge, 2018] Ian
Millington
and
John
Funge.
Artificial intelligence for games.
CRC Press,
2018. 2
[Morgenstern and Von Neumann, 1953] Oskar Morgenstern
and John Von Neumann. Theory of games and economic
behavior. Princeton university press, 1953. 2
[Pearl, 1980a] Judea Pearl. Asymptotic properties of mini-
max trees and game-searching procedures. Artificial Intel-
ligence, 14(2):113–138, 1980. 2
[Pearl, 1980b] Judea Pearl. Scout: A simple game-searching
algorithm with proven optimal properties. In AAAI, pages
143–145, 1980. 2
[Pearl, 1982] Judea Pearl. The solution for the branching fac-
tor of the alpha-beta pruning algorithm and its optimality.
Communications of the ACM, 25(8):559–564, 1982. 2
[Plaat et al., 1996] Aske Plaat, Jonathan Schaeffer, Wim Pi-
jls, and Arie De Bruin. Best-first fixed-depth minimax al-
gorithms. Artificial Intelligence, 87(1-2):255–293, 1996.
2
[Plaat et al., 2017] Aske Plaat, Jonathan Schaeffer, Wim Pi-
jls, and Arie De Bruin.
A minimax algorithm bet-
ter than alpha-beta?:
No and yes.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.03401, 2017. 2
[Qi et al., 2020] Zhiyang Qi, Xiaosong Huang, Yu Shen, and
Jiyun Shi. Optimization of connect6 based on principal
variation search and transposition tables algorithms.
In
2020 Chinese Control And Decision Conference (CCDC),
pages 198–203. IEEE, 2020. 2
[Russell and Norvig, 2016] Stuart
J
Russell
and
Peter
Norvig.
Artificial intelligence:
a modern approach.
Malaysia; Pearson Education Limited,, 2016. 2
[Schaeffer, 1983] Jonathan Schaeffer. The history heuristic.
ICGA Journal, 6(3):16–19, 1983. 2
[Schaeffer, 1990] Jonathan Schaeffer. Conspiracy numbers.
Artificial Intelligence, 43(1):67–84, 1990. 2
[Silver et al., 2017] David
Silver,
Julian
Schrittwieser,
Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur
Guez, Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian
Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of go without human
knowledge. Nature, 550(7676):354, 2017. 2
[Silver et al., 2018] David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian
Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur
Guez, Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran,
Thore Graepel, et al.
A general reinforcement learning
algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-
play. Science, 362(6419):1140–1144, 2018. 1, 2
[Winands et al., 2008] Mark
HM
Winands,
Yngvi
Bj¨ornsson, and Jahn-Takeshi Saito.
Monte-carlo tree
search solver. In International Conference on Computers
and Games, pages 25–36. Springer, 2008. 2
[Yannakakis and Togelius, 2018] Georgios
N
Yannakakis
and Julian Togelius. Artificial intelligence and games, vol-
ume 2. Springer, 2018. 2
Appendix
This appendix provides technical details of the experiments
(Section 8.1), some remarks (Section 8.2), and the formal
proofs of the article (Section 8.3).
8.1
Technical Details
For clarity and compactness in data tables, all game-specific
performance percentages are rounded to the nearest whole
number.
We use the Adastra supercomputer: a node is based on 1
AMD Trento EPYC 7A53 (64 cores 2.0 GHz processor), 256
Gio of DDR4-3200 MHz CPU memory, 4 Slingshot 200 Gb/s
NICs, 8 GPUs devices (4 AMD MI250X accelerator, each
with 2 GPUs) with a total of 512 Gio of HBM2. Note that 64
matches are carried out in parallel on a node. Programs are
written in Python using tensorflow.
8.2
Remarks
Note that by removing the pruning procedure from these al-
gorithms (i.e. to set r (s) = 1 when |c (s)| = 1), they can be
used to strongly solve perfect-information two-player games
(and therefore to determine all the winning strategies for each
state of the game), which has a much higher computational
cost.
8.3
Completeness of Unbounded Minimax-Based
Algorithms
We now show that any Unbounded Minimax-based algorithm
is complete.
Note first that if a state is marked as resolved (i.e. r(s) =
1), its values do not change:
Lemma 10. Let ˆs be a state of a perfect two-player game G.
If r (ˆs) = 1 before an iteration of a Unbounded Minimax-
based algorithm on a certain state ˆs′ of G then after the iter-
ation, r (ˆs) and c (ˆs) have not changed.
Proof. Let ˆs be a state of G.
Remark first that if a state s satisfies r(s) = 1 then s ∈Sp.
Indeed, on the one hand, if s is non-terminal, r(s) has been
set to 1 in the large else block. Thus, either there is an entry in
the second if block and then s has been added to Sp or there
is no entry in the second if block and then by the condition
of this if block, we have s ∈Sp. On the other hand, if s is
terminal, there are two places where r(s) can be set to 1, and
in each of these places, s is added to Sp.
Secondly remark the following fact.
Let s′ be a non-
terminal child state of any state s of the sequence of states
analysed by an iteration of a Unbounded Minimax-based al-
gorithm. If during the iteration, the values c(s′) and r(s′)
are updated, then s′ /∈Sp (see the else block in the foreach
block in Algorithm 4). Since the state ˆs satisfies r (ˆs) = 1 by
hypothesis, we have ˆs ∈Sp and thus, values of ˆs cannot be
modified by this part of the algorithm.
Moreover, as a recursive call of a Unbounded Minimax-
based algorithm is only performed on a state s such that
r(s) = 0 (since s belongs to A), a modification by the algo-
rithm of the values r(ˆs) and c(ˆs) necessarily implies that ei-
ther this state ˆs is the initial state ˆs′ (that of the non-recursive
call of the algorithm, i.e. the first call in the recursion) or that
ˆs is terminal (since we have r(ˆs) = 1). Thus, there are two
cases to analyze.
On the one hand, if ˆs is terminal, when the values r(ˆs)
and c(ˆs) are updated by the algorithm, they are not modified
(since there are only two places in the algorithm where the
values of a terminal state are assigned and these assignments
are equal and constant for each state).
On the other hand, suppose ˆs is the initial state and is non-
terminal. Since r(ˆs) = 1, there is no entry in the third if
block. Thus, the only place where the values can be modified
is just before the third if block. There is two cases: either
r(s′) = 1 for each s′ ∈A(ˆs) or c(s) = 1 and there exists s′ ∈
A(ˆs) such that c(ˆs) = c(s′) and r(s′) = 1. By induction, the
values r(s′) and c(s′) of child states safisfying r(s′) = 1 have
not been modified and thus the values r(ˆs) and c(ˆs) have not
been modified.
Note now that a state s is marked as resolved (i.e. r(s) = 1)
if and only if all of its children are marked as resolved (any
child state s′ satisfies r(s′) = 1) or s is marked as winning
for the first player (c(s) = 1) or it is marked as losing for the
first player (c(s) = −1):
Lemma 11. Let (Sp, A) be a game tree built by a Unbounded
Minimax-based algorithm from a certain state. Let s ∈Sp.
We have the following properties:
• If r (s) = 1, then either |c (s)| = 1 or for all s′ ∈A (s),
r (s′) = 1 ;
• If |c (s)| = 1, then r (s) = 1 ;
• If for all s′ ∈A (s), r (s′) = 1, then r (s) = 1.
Proof. By definition of the algorithm (in particular by the
definition and by the use of the method backup resolution(s)
and because as soon as r (s) = 1, r (s) and c (s) do not
change anymore (Lemma 10)).
We now show that if a state s is marked as resolved (r(s) =
1) then it is resolved, i.e. its completion value is equal to its
minimax value (c (s) = M (s)):
Proposition 12. Let (Sp, A) be a game tree built by a Un-
bounded Minimax-based algorithm from a certain state and
let s ∈Sp.
If r (s) = 1, then c (s) = M (s).
Proof. Let (Sp, A) be a game tree built by a Unbounded
Minimax-based algorithm from a certain state (i.e. the al-
gorithm has been applied k times on that state). We show this
property by induction. Let s ∈Sp such that r (s) = 1. We
first show that this property is true for terminal states.
Thus, suppose in addition that t (s) is true.
Therefore,
c (s) = fb (s). Consequently, c (s) = fb (s) = M (s).
We now show this property for non-terminal states: there-
fore suppose instead that t (s) is false.
• Suppose on the one hand that j (s) = 1.
If r (s) = 1, then either |c (s)| = 1 or for all s′ ∈A (s),
r (s′) = 1, by Lemma 11. If c (s) = −1, then, at the itera-
tion that calculated c (s) = −1, we had: for all s′ ∈A (s),
c (s′) = −1 (as at this moment c (s) = maxs′∈A(s) c (s′)).
Therefore, since this iteration, we have for all s′ ∈A (s),
r (s′) = 1 (by Lemma 11 and Lemma 10). Thus, we have
in fact two cases: either c (s) = 1 or for all s′ ∈A (s),
r (s′) = 1.
If for all s′ ∈A (s), r (s′) = 1, then, by induction, we
have for all s′ ∈A (s), c (s′) = M (s′).
But c (s) =
maxs′∈A(s) c (s′). Therefore, c (s) = maxs′∈A(s) M (s′),
hence c (s) = M (s).
If c (s) = 1, then there exists ˜s ∈A (s) such that
c (˜s) = c (s) at the iteration calculating c (s) = 1 (as c (s) =
maxs′∈A(s) c (s′) at this iteration). Since we had c (˜s) = 1 at
this iteration, we also had r (˜s) = 1, by Lemma 11. There-
fore, we always have c (˜s) = c (s) and r (˜s) = 1. Moreover,
by induction, c (˜s) = M (˜s), hence c (s) = M (˜s). However,
since M (˜s) = 1, we have M (˜s) ≥M (s′) for all s′ ∈A (s).
Thus, c (s) = maxs′∈A(s) M (s′), hence c (s) = M (s).
• Now suppose on the other hand, instead that j (s) = 2.
(this case is analogous to the previous case, we detail it
anyway in the rest of the proof).
If r (s) = 1 then either |c (s)| = 1 or for all s′ ∈A (s),
r (s′) = 1, by Lemma 11. If c (s) = 1, then at the itera-
tion that calculated c (s) = 1, we had: for all s′ ∈A (s),
c (s′) = 1 (as at this moment c (s) = mins′∈A(s) c (s′)).
Therefore, since this iteration, for all s′ ∈A (s), r (s′) = 1
(by Lemma 11 and Lemma 10). Thus, we have two cases:
either c (s) = −1 or for all s′ ∈A (s), r (s′) = 1.
If for all s′ ∈A (s), r (s′) = 1, then, by induction, we
have for all s′ ∈A (s), c (s′) = M (s′).
But c (s) =
mins′∈A(s) c (s′).
Therefore c (s) = mins′∈A(s) M (s′),
hence c (s) = M (s).
If c (s) = −1, then there exists ˜s ∈A (s) such that c (˜s) =
c (s) at the iteration calculating c (s) = −1 (as c (s) =
mins′∈A(s) c (s′) at this iteration). Since we had c (˜s) = −1
at this iteration, we also had r (˜s) = 1, by Lemma 11. There-
fore, we always have c (˜s) = c (s) and r (˜s) = 1. More-
over, by induction, c (˜s) = M (˜s), hence c (s) = M (˜s).
However, since M (˜s) = −1, we have M (˜s) ≤M (s′)
for all s′ ∈A (s). Thus, c (s) = mins′∈A(s) M (s′), hence
c (s) = M (s).
In the lemma below, we show under which sufficient condi-
tions an iteration of a Unbounded Minimax-based algorithm
terminates.
Lemma 13. Let A be a Unbounded Minimax-based algo-
rithm and s′ be a non-terminal state of a perfect two-player
game such that r(s′) = 0.
An iteration of the algorithm A on the state s′ ends in
a state s such that either s /∈Sp before the iteration and
s ∈Sp after the iteration or r(s) = 0 before the iteration
and r(s) = 1 after the iteration.
Proof. Let s be the state in which ends an iteration, denoted
I, of a Unbounded Minimax-based algorithm applied to a
non-terminal state s′ satisfying r(s′) = 0.
Note first that when the algorithm terminates, necessarily
either
s is terminal, r(s) = 1 after the iteration I, or b is true, i.e.
s /∈Sp before the iteration and s ∈Sp after the iteration.
We first show that before the iteration I, we still have
r(s) = 0. Two cases must be analysed. The first is when
the algorithm ends in the initial state s′. By assumption, we
have r(s) = 0. The second case is when the algorithm does
not end in the initial state, which implies that the state s be-
longs to the set of actions A = {s′′ ∈A (ˆs) | r (s′′) = 0} for
some state ˆs. We thus also have r(s) = 0. Note that A is
never empty, since when there is no more child s′′ of ˆs satis-
fying r(s′′) = 0, r(ˆs) has been set to 1 and thus there is no
more entrance in the third if block where A is computed.
To finish showing the lemma, we just have to show that the
last state s of the iteration I is never terminal. If the iteration
stops in the initial state s′, by hypothesis, we have s = s′ is
never terminal.
Suppose s ̸= s′. Thus, s belongs to the set of actions A
of a certain state ˆs (ˆs is the parent state of s, i.e. the previ-
ous state in the recursion). Therefore, we have r(s) = 0. In
addition, necessarily before the entry into the third if block
which allows one the calculation of the set A of ˆs, there was
an iteration I′ (potentially I = I′) where ˆs was added to Sp.
More precisely, this addition, during the iteration I′, neces-
sarily takes place in the second if block (since ˆs is not termi-
nal). Thus, when entering this second if block, if s is termi-
nal, r(s) was set by 1. By contraposition, if r(s) = 0 at the
output of this block, then s is not terminal. Since r(s) = 0
at the beginning of the iteration I (and if r(s) = 1, r(s) re-
mains constant by Lemma 10), s is therefore not terminal.
This concludes the proof of the lemma.
We now show that, all Unbounded Minimax-based algo-
rithm mark any game state as resolved after a finite number
of iterations:
Proposition 14. Let A be a Unbounded Minimax-based al-
gorithm, S be the set of states of a perfect two-player game,
and s ∈S.
There exists N ∈N such that after applying N times the
algorithm A on the state s, we have r (s) = 1.
Proof. We show that with at most N = 2 |S| iterations of
the algorithm A applied on a same state s ∈S, we have
r (s) = 1. Note first that if s is terminal or satisfies r (s) = 1,
then after having applied the algorithm, we have r (s) = 1.
Now suppose that s is not terminal and satisfies r (s) = 0.
By Lemma 13, we have that each iteration adds in Sp at least
one state of S not being in Sp or marks as “resolved” an ad-
ditional state, that is, a state s′ ∈S satisfying r (s′) = 0,
satisfies r (s′) = 1 after the iteration. This is sufficient to
show the property, because either after one of the iterations,
we have r (s) = 1, or the iterative application of the algo-
rithm ends up adding in Sp all descendants of s and/or by
marking as “resolved” all states of Sp. Indeed, if all the de-
scendants of s are added then necessarily r (s) = 1 (since by
induction all descendants verify r (s) = 1 ; by definition and
use of backup resolution(s)). Since S is finite, with at most
2 |S| iterations, r (s) = 1.
From the previous Lemmas and Propositions, we con-
clude to the completeness of Unbounded Minimax-based al-
gorithms:
Theorem 15. Any Unbounded Minimax-based algorithm is
complete.
Proof. By Proposition 14, then by Proposition 12.
