Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for
Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
Jiajun Hu1,†, Núria Armengol Urpí2,3,†, Jin Cheng2, Stelian Coros2
jiajun.hu@epfl.ch,
{nuriaa,jcheng}@ethz.ch
1EPFL
2ETH Zurich
3Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
†Corresponding authors
Abstract
Zero-shot reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms aim to learn a family of policies from
a reward-free dataset, and recover optimal policies for any reward function directly at
test time. Naturally, the quality of the pretraining dataset determines the performance of
the recovered policies across tasks. However, pre-collecting a relevant, diverse dataset
without prior knowledge of the downstream tasks of interest remains a challenge. In
this work, we study online zero-shot RL for quadrupedal control on real robotic sys-
tems, building upon the Forward-Backward (FB) algorithm. We observe that undirected
exploration yields low-diversity data, leading to poor downstream performance and ren-
dering policies impractical for direct hardware deployment. Therefore, we introduce
FB-MEBE, an online zero-shot RL algorithm that combines an unsupervised behavior
exploration strategy with a regularization critic. FB-MEBE promotes exploration by
maximizing the entropy of the achieved behavior distribution. Additionally, a regular-
ization critic shapes the recovered policies toward more natural and physically plausible
behaviors. We empirically demonstrate that FB-MEBE achieves and improved perfor-
mance compared to other exploration strategies in a range of simulated downstream
tasks, and that it renders natural policies that can be seamlessly deployed to hardware
without further finetuning. Videos and code available on our website.
Behavior
Exploration
Reward
Optimization
Figure 1: FB-MEBE improves behavior exploration by maximizing the behavior entropy during
training. With the regularizer critic, FB-MEBE achieves zero-shot hardware deployment by opti-
mizing reward at inference time.
1
arXiv:2603.25464v1  [cs.LG]  26 Mar 2026
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
1
Introduction
Zero-shot reinforcement learning (RL) (Touati et al., 2023) has emerged as a promising paradigm
for developing general-purpose agents. By learning successor measures that decouple dynamics
from rewards, these methods generate near-optimal policies for a big family of reward functions at
test time, with minimal amount of computation and relying solely on unlabeled, precollected data.
This departs from standard, fixed-reward-based RL (Sutton & Barto, 1998), which typically requires
training a new policy whenever the objective changes. As these methods scale beyond complex and
broader settings, they are usually referred to as Behavior Foundation Models (BFMs) (Tirinzoni
et al., 2025). Such generalization capabilities are particularly appealing for robotics, where usually
learning relevant policies involves tedious reward engineering. While general-purpose foundation
models trained on vast amounts of (un)labeled data have emerged as a promising paradigm for
robotic manipulation (Intelligence et al., 2025; Brohan et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2024), the applica-
tion of BFMs for legged systems still remains underexplored. One of the main bottlenecks is the
reliance on large, diverse, task-agnostic precollected datasets (Laskin et al., 2021), which are often
unavailable at scale for legged robots.
Recently, Tirinzoni et al. (2025) proposed an online zero-shot RL algorithm grounding policy learn-
ing and exploration towards an external motion capture dataset. Based on this idea, BFM-Zero (Li
et al., 2025) represents an early effort to transfer such zero-shot RL methods to a humanoid robot.
However, these methods still rely on supervision from external datasets. In this paper, we focus on
the quadrupedal setting. We observe that naive deployment of online FB suffers from ineffective
exploration and has difficulties in discovering the sparse manifold of stable locomotion. In contrast
to previously explored efforts (Li et al., 2025), large motion capture dataset are not readily available
for quadrupedal robots and thus cannot be used to regularize exploration.
We thus propose FB-MEBE (Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration), an online zero-shot RL
framework based on the forward-backward (FB) algorithm (Touati & Ollivier, 2021), which does
not require access to external datasets.
FB-MEBE leverages an unsupervised behavior exploration strategy that guides the agent to max-
imize the entropy of the achieved behavior distribution, similarly to (Pitis et al., 2020). Closest to
our work, (Urpí et al., 2025) framed the exploration problem in FB as a minimization of the epis-
temic uncertainty that the algorithm has of its representations. In our case, we adopt a frequentist
approach, guiding the agent towards reaching behaviors with low visitation count. This strategy
implicitly induces a curriculum on the behaviors with which to explore next, effectively pushing the
frontier of achievable behaviors. Furthermore, to ensure that the manifold of solutions induced by
the unsupervised strategy is aligned with the downstream task of interest, we embed an inductive
bias to favor physically plausible behaviors via a behavior regularizer. This forces the recovered
policies to maintain their zero-shot capabilities while being readily deployable to real hardware.
We empirically demonstrate that FB-MEBE achieves improved downstream performance compared
to other exploration strategies in simulation in a range of downstream tasks, and that it renders poli-
cies with natural behaviors that can be seamlessly deployed to hardware without further finetuning.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the second instantiation of the FB algorithm on real robotic
systems, and the very first to do so entirely online without relying on prior external datasets. In
summary, in this work we provide a maximum entropy exploration strategy for efficiently learning
FB representations online that a) exhibits improved downstream performance in quadruped tasks in
simulation compared to other exploration alternatives, b) renders policies with smooth, physically
plausible behaviors and c) enables the direct, zero-shot deployment of recovered policies onto real
hardware.
2
Related Work
Zero-shot RL
Zero-shot RL spans a range of methods that train agents on unsupervised data to
enable zero-shot generalization to a wide range of tasks. It traces back to successor representations
2
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
(Dayan, 1993), a direct extension to the continuous MDPs being the successor features (Barreto
et al., 2017). In (Borsa et al., 2018), given a handcrafted feature map on the states, it defines the
set of all reward functions that lie on the linear span of the features. Several extensions have been
proposed to learn the features map (Hansen et al., 2019; Laskin et al., 2021). The forward backward
algorithm, FB (Touati & Ollivier, 2021; Touati et al., 2023), applies a similar idea to a finite-rank
model of successor measures, adopting a contrastive loss computing pairwise dot-products across
each training batch, and learns the feature map and corresponding successor features jointly. FB
has been subsequently extended to alternative parameterizations (Bagatella et al., 2025; Cetin et al.,
2025), for zero-shot imitation (Pirotta et al., 2024), offline training from low quality data (Jeen et al.,
2023), online training regularized with unlabeled expert data(Tirinzoni et al., 2025), training on en-
vironments with different dynamics (Bobrin et al., 2025), extending it to optimising general utilities
beyond linear RL (Bagatella et al., 2026) online finetuning (Sikchi et al., 2025), test-time task infer-
ence (Rupf et al., 2025) or self-supervised exploration (Urpí et al., 2025; Sun et al., 2025). Other
zero-shot methods are HILP (Park et al., 2024a), that learn state features with a goal reaching loss
in a latent space and PSM (Agarwal et al., 2025) learning an affine decomposition of the succesor
measure for a discrete codebook of policies.
Exploration in unsupervised RL
There has been vast work on exploration in unsupervised RL
(Eysenbach et al., 2018; Burda et al., 2018; Sharma et al., 2020; Park et al., 2024b) or unsupervised
goal-conditioned RL focused on discovering a wide range of goals and learning corresponding goal-
reaching policies (Mendonca et al., 2021; Bagaria & Konidaris, 2019), exploring with goals that have
lower density (Pitis et al., 2020; Pong et al., 2019; Diaz-Bone et al., 2025; Florensa et al., 2018).Most
of these work, in contrast to zero-shot RL require separate methods for learning policies. Closest to
our work, Urpí et al. (2025) framed the exploration problem in online FB as a minimization of the
epistemic uncertainty exploring with task embeddings that lead to the highest information gain and
Sun et al. (2025) leverage RND for promoting data diversity.
3
Background
We consider a standard reward-free Markov decision process (MDP), defined by the tuple
M = (S, A, P, γ, d0), where S, A are the state and action space, P is the transition kernel,
γ ∈(0, 1) is the discount factor and d0 is the initial state distribution. Given the MDP M, a
policy π : S →∆A, mapping states to probabilities over actions, its successor measure (Dayan,
1993; Blier et al., 2021) for any initial state-action pair (s0, a0) ∈S × A is the discounted cumu-
lative distribution of visiting future states when starting from state s0 ∈S, take action a ∈A and
following policy π thereafter. Formally, it is defined as
M π(X|s0, a0) =
X
t≥0
γtP(st+1 ∈X|s0, a0, π)
∀X ∈S.
(1)
Conveniently, the action-value function for policy π and any reward function r : S →R, can be
expressed as
Qπ
r (s, a) := E
 X
t≥0
γtr(st+1)|s, a, π

=
Z
s′∈S
M π(ds′ | s, a) r(s′),
(2)
which decomposes the Q-function between a reward agnostic measure M π, modeling the evolution
of the policy in the environment, and the reward function. There exist several algorithms for learning
zero-shot policy agents (Eysenbach et al., 2021; Borsa et al., 2018; Agarwal et al., 2025), but in this
work we will focus on the Forward Backward (FB) (Touati & Ollivier, 2021; Touati et al., 2023)
algorithm. See related work and Section K for extensive analysis.
Given a representation space Z ⊆Rd (usually the unit hypersphere of radius
√
d, and a family
of policies πz∈Z, parameterized by z, the FB algorithm aims to learn a forward representation
3
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
F π : S × A × Z →Z and a backward representation B : S →Z such that the successor measure
in Equation (1) admits the low-rank factorization
M πz(ds′ | s, a) ≈F(s, a, z)⊤B(s′)ρ(ds′)
πz(s) = arg max
a
F(s, a, z)⊤z,
(3)
where ρ is the state distribution, z ∈Z is the task embedding of policy πz. The FB networks are
trained to minimize a temporal-difference contrastive loss over transitions {(s, a, s′)}, independant
future states {s+}, and reward embeddings z ∼ν, where ν is a distribution over Z specified later:
LFB(F, B) = Ez∼ν, (s,a,s′)∼ρ,
s+∼ρ, a′∼πz(s′)
h F(s, a, z)⊤B(s+) −γF(s′, a′, z)⊤B(s+)
2i
−2 Ez∼ν, (s,a,s′)∼ρ
h
F(s, a, z)⊤B(s′)
i
,
(4)
where F and B denote target networks and ρ is the dataset distribution. In practice, as per Touati
et al. (2023) additional regularization terms are used, see Section A for details.
The arg max in Equation (3) is approximated by jointly training an actor network with the following
loss:
Lactor(π) = −Ez∼ν, s∼ρ, a∼πz(s)

F(s, a, z)⊤z

.
(5)
After training, given a reward function r specified at test time, we can find the task embedding zr
parameterizing the optimal learnt policy for reward r, by performing a simple linear regression of r
onto the span of the learnt features B. For FB, the reward embedding can be computed simply via
zr = Es∼ρ

B(s)r(s)

(Touati & Ollivier, 2021), where the expectation is approximated through
sampling from the dataset distribution used for training (or a subset).
If Equation (3) holds, then for any reward function r in the linear span of the features, the policy πzr
is guaranteed to be optimal with optimal Q-function Q∗
r(s, a) = F(s, a, zr)⊤zr (Touati & Ollivier,
2021). In practice, the quality of the learnt representation depends on the chosen factorization d and
the coverage of the data ρ used to train them. In this work, we focus on the second issue.
The optimality criteria of FB (Touati & Ollivier, 2021) shows that it is sufficient to sample latents z
from a distribution ν that has support over the entire hypersphere. Previous works (Tirinzoni et al.,
2025) propose biasing a fraction r of the latent samples for exploration and training to allocate more
model capacity for goal-reaching tasks. Our work focuses on a novel sampling strategy for efficient
exploration.1
4
Limitations of Regularized Undirected Exploration
Naturally, how well we can recover the optimal policies depends on the quality of data used to learn
them. However, when d is finite and when the dataset has narrow data distributions, the learning
objective lacks sufficient inductive bias on which policies to favor. This often leads to a collapse of
the FB representations.
Consistent with empirical observations in (Tirinzoni et al., 2025), our findings demonstrate this
failure mode. In Figure 2 we report the average zero-shot performance when using an undirected
exploration strategy, i.e., exploring by uniformly sampling random reward embeddings from the
hypersphere. We observe that this strategy suffers from performance degradation and entropy stag-
nation. Additionally, the recovered policies exhibit severe foot dragging which prevents seamless
sim-to-real transfer. To mitigate these issues, we propose to ground the unsupervised policy learning
by adding a regularizer. Formally, this leads to the actor loss objective:
LFB-Critic(π) = −Ez∼ν, s∼ρ, a∼πz(s)
h
F(s, a, z)⊤z + λreg Qreg(s, a)
i
(6)
1Remark: Most of existing works leveraging the FB framework (Touati et al., 2023; Cetin et al., 2025; Pirotta et al., 2024)
are offline methods, where ρ is the dataset distribution collected by decoupled unsupervised exploration methods. Our work
is in the online setting instead, where we do not have access to external datasets and we collect data transitions jointly with
the learning of the FB algorithm.
4
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
 
 
 
Figure 3: Maximum Entropy Behavior Forward-Backward Exploration: FB-MEBE is an online
zero-shot RL algorithm that collects data by acting with behaviors zexp that maximize the entropy
of the achieved behavior distribution. Collected data is used to train policies with a regularized loss
combining policy improvement objective based on the FB action value function (QF B) and a critic
(Qreg) trained on a behavior regularizer reward to induce meaningful locomotion patterns.
where Qreg is a critic trained with a behavior regularizer reward. We refer interested readers to the
details at Sections F and G. While this modification regularizes the solution manifold by effectively
suppressing foot dragging (see Figure 2 (right)), we find that exploration degrades further, resulting
in lower entropy and performance. To tackle this issues, in the next section we introduce FB-MEBE,
an algorithmic modification to FB exploration strategies to improve downstream task performance.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Step (x10000)
0
20
40
60
80
Mean Return
Velocity-tracking Reward and Entropy vs Step
FB
FB-Critic
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Feet Slippage
Feet Slippage at 300K Steps
0
1
2
3
4
5
Mean Entropy
FB
FB-CRITIC
Figure 2: Limitations of undirected exploration: Standard FB algorithm with undirected exploration
(FB) suffers from performance degradation and entropy stagnation (left, higher is better) and yields
unnatural behaviors (right, lower is better). While introducing a behavior regularizer (FB-critic)
leads to more plausible behaviors (right), it leads to severe performance degradation and further
reduces behavior diversity (left).
5
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration
5.1
Density-Inverse Exploration for Online FB
How should a zero-shot RL agent explore in an environment in order to accumulate diverse, relevant
data, while aligned with downstream task of interest? While we lack a proper characterization of
5
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
which data is relevant a priori, the support of the empirical training distribution ρ must cover the
occupancy measures of policies optimal for downstream tasks zd
r. Hence, an exploration strategy
should select intrinsic behaviors zt
r to bring the agent’s historical achieved behavior distribution
pt
za
r close to the downstream behavior distribution pzdr . This can be formalized with the following
distribution matching objective:
Joracle(pt
za
r ) = DKL(pzdr ||pt
za
r )
(7)
where pt
za
r is the distribution of achieved behaviors in the replay buffer at time t and DKL is the
forward KL divergence (support covering). Unfortunately, in the unsupervised setting, objective in
Equation (7) is intractable, because we do not have access to the desired behavior distribution pzdr . In
the absence of a useful inductive bias on the direction where to expand the support of pza
r , similarly
to Pitis et al. (2020), we expand the support on all directions maximizing the entropy of the achieved
behavior distribution H[pt
za
r ]. This leads to the following objective:
JMEBE(pt
za
r ) = −H[pt
za
r ],
(8)
implicitly inducing a curriculum on the behaviors with which explore next to effectively push the
frontier of achievable behaviors. To optimize Equation (8), at time t we act with an exploration
policy πE
t with reward embedding zE
r such that
zE
r = arg max
zr∈Z
Ez′r∼q(z′r|zr)H

pt
za
r ∪z′r

.
(9)
Importantly, Equation (9) depends on q(z′
r|zr) which encodes the conditional probability of achiev-
ing behavior z′
r if we act with the policy parameterized with zr, which we do not know. However,
we observe that the entropy H[pt
za
r ] is maximized when the distribution of achieved behaviors is
uniform over the behavior space. Consequently, rather than predicting future outcomes, FB-MEBE
steers the achieved behavior distribution towards uniformity by sampling exploration behaviors zE
r
that have the minimum density in the current buffer.
5.2
Pratical FB-MEBE
Let qΨ(za
r ) be the density model trained on the achieved behaviors stored in the replay buffer. We
sample exploration behaviors according to a distribution that is inversely proportional to their esti-
mated density, i.e.,
zE
r ∝(qψ(za
r ) + ϵ)−β
(10)
where ϵ > 0 ensures numerical stability and β ≥0 controls the strength of the inverse reweighting.
In practice, because we have direct access to states, we learn the density model on the space of
achieved states qΨ(s) instead (or on a projection φ(s)2 of it). This effectively focuses on goal-
reaching behaviors, i.e., zr = B(s), and could circumvent challenges arising from representation
drifts that occur due to B representations changing through time.
Various approaches can be used to estimate the state density, such as Kernel Density Estimation
(KDE), Variational Autoencoders (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013), k-NN particle estimators, Ran-
dom Network Distillation (RND) (Burda et al., 2018) or normalizing flows (Rezende & Mohamed,
2015). We chose normalizing flows (NFs) to fit our density qΨ(s) over all the alternatives due to its
efficient likelihood evaluation, compared to quadratic computation cost of non-parametric models,
while offering true density estimates compared to surrogates produced by RND or VAE. Leverag-
ing NFs for unsupervised goal sampling has been also explored in (Ghugare & Eysenbach, 2025).
Note that during the inverse sampling process, the state s is sampled from the replay buffer rather
than from the flow model to improve training stability. Details for the NF can be found in Table 7.
Finally, we explore with the set of policies with reward embedding
{zE
j = B(sE
j )}K
j=1,
sE
j ∼(qt
ψ(s))−β
(11)
2To focus exploration on relevant parts of the state space, we learn the density on projections of it i.e., φ : S →S′, where
S ⊆Rd, S′ ⊆Rm, m < d.
6
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
where K is the number of exploration policies collecting data in parallel and qt
ψ(s) is the density
model fitted on data from the replay buffer at episode t.
Finally, as reported in Section 4, FB-MEBE regularizes exploration by enforcing relevant gait pat-
terns via a behavior regularizer, as in Equation (6). We provide a pseudocode for our algorithm in
Algorithm 1 and a visual schematic of FB-MEBE in Figure 3. For details, see Sections G and J.
Algorithm 1 Maximum entropy behavior exploration (FB-MEBE)
1: Input: Fθ and ¯Fθ, Bϕ and ¯Bϕ, qΨ, Qreg
2: while not converged do
3:
Sample behavior zE
r according to eq. (11).
4:
Collect data Dn = Rollout(π(zE
r )).
5:
Add data to buffer D1:n = D1:n−1 ∪Dn.
6:
Fit Fθ, Bϕ, policies πz, qΨ and Qreg with D1:n.
7: end while
6
Experiments
Our experiments are designed to address the following questions:
i) Does FB-MEBE produce more natural behaviors than unregularized counterparts?
ii) Does FB-MEBE achieve gains in performance comparing with other exploration strategies?
iii) Does FB-MEBE enable effective transfer from simulation to real-world hardware?
Environment.
All experiments are conducted in IsaacLab simulation environment (Mittal et al.,
2025). We use the Unitree Go2 quadruped robot with 12 degrees of freedom. The action space is
defined as A ⊆[−1, +1]12. The simulation runs at 200 Hz, while the PD controller operates at
50 Hz. Details about state space and domain randomization can be found in Section I.
Task Metrics.
We evaluate FB-MEBE on two different sets of downstream tasks: velocity-
tracking tasks and base orientation tasks. Both the velocity-tracking and base-orientation settings
consists of 17 downstream tasks. Performance is measured by the average episode return achieved
on each task, with the episode length equals 250 steps and a maximum achievable reward of 250.
Detailed downstream task reward are in appendix Section E. We additionally report the foot sliding
to assess locomotion quality (details in Section F).
Baselines.
We compare FB-MEBE with several baselines and ablations. FB (Touati & Ollivier,
2021) performs undirected exploration by uniformly sampling random reward embeddings from the
hypersphere. FB-Critic uses the same uniform exploration strategy as FB but includes our proposed
behavior regularizer (see Section 4). This isolates the performance gains provided by our explo-
ration strategy from the gains provided by the regularizer. FB-MEBE (β=2, our method) includes
a behavior regularizer and directs exploration sampling 80% of its embeddings with our proposed
MEBE strategy (Equation (11)) and 20% using uniform random embeddings. Finally, we include an
ablation FB-MEBE (β=0), which sets the reverse sampling coefficient β to zero. This can be seen
as an instantiation of FB-CPR (Tirinzoni et al., 2025), with no data prior. Instead of prioritizing
rare behaviors, it performs uniform exploration over the achieved behaviors. This isolates the per-
formance gains provided by our exploration strategy from the gains provided by the biasing towards
goal-reaching behaviors. For other ablations on the β parameter and on sampling strategies, see
Sections C.1 and C.2, respectively.
In practice, to focus exploration on relevant parts of the state space, we conduct exploration over
a lower-dimensional projections of the state rather than directly operating on the full state space.
Formally we define a projection mapping φ : S →S′, where S ⊆Rd, S′ ⊆Rm, m < d. For
7
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
velocity-tracking tasks, exploration is performed in the planar base velocity space [vx, vy]. For base-
orientation tasks exploration is performed in the space of the gravity vector expressed in the robot
base frame [gx, gy, gz], which characterizes the base orientation. While this restricts the exploration
scop to task-relevant settings, FB-MEBE could be easily extended to operate directly on the full
state-space, which we leave for future work.
6.1
Main Results
5
10
15
20
25
30
Step (x10000)
0.0
0.2
0.4
Normalized Mean Return
Velocity-tracking Reward vs Step
0
2
4
6
Entropy
Entropy on [vx, vy, ωz]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Feet Slippage
Feet Slippage
FB
FB-Critic
FB-MEBE (β=0)
FB-MEBE
5
10
15
20
25
30
Step (x10000)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Normalized Mean Return
Orientation Return vs Step
0
1
2
3
4
Entropy
Entropy on [gx, gy, gz]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Slippage
Feet Slippage
FB
FB-Critic
FB-MEBE (β=0)
FB-MEBE
Figure 4: Left: Zero-shot performance averaged over 17 downstream velocity tracking tasks (top)
and orientation tasks (bottom). We plot normalized return wrt the mean return of Fast-TD3 (Seo
et al., 2025). Results are averaged across 5 random seeds, with shaded regions indicating ± 1-
standard deviation. Middle: Policy entropy on [vx, vy, wz] (top) and [gx, gy, gz] (bottom) measured
at 300K training steps. (Higher is better). Right: Feet slippage measured at 300K training steps.
(Lower is better).
Overall Performance.
In Figure 4, we report results on several downstream tasks. All returns are
normalized using the mean return achieved by Fast-TD3 (Seo et al., 2025). Fast-TD3 is a supervised
reinforcement learning algorithm trained directly with task-specific rewards, and therefore serves as
an approximate upper bound under explicit reward supervision. In contrast, all FB-based methods
are trained without access to downstream task rewards and must rely on unsupervised exploration
to acquire useful behaviors. FB-MEBE achieves an average performance that is the highest over
all the other baselines for velocity tracking tasks or on par with best performing baseline for ori-
entation tasks. Most notably, it yields the highest entropy among all baselines. This indicates that
FB-MEBE expands behavioral coverage during online training. Importantly, this broader explo-
ration translates into improved downstream task performance rather than unstructured behavior di-
versification. This can be further seen in Figures 5 and 6 where FB-MEBE outperforms all other
baselines in extreme downstream tasks. For orientation tasks, FB-MEBE shows lower sample ef-
ficiency than FB-MEBE-β = 0, showcasing that unprioritized goal-reaching exploration can be a
valid strategy for some downstream tasks. In contrast, FB and FB Critic performs the worst among
all algorithms, which we attribute to uninformed exploration (FB) and the additional regularization
8
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
constraints (FB-critic) that overly restrict exploration, specially in velocity-tracking tasks, leading
to limited behavioral coverage and consequently lower average performance. Regarding gait-related
metrics, FB-MEBE substantially reduces the feet slide penalty compared to the original FB, indi-
cating that the regularization critic successfully suppresses unnatural dragging behaviors. Although
FB-MEBE exhibits slightly higher feet slippage than FB-Critic, this difference is expected. Since
FB-MEBE actively explores higher locomotion velocities, increased horizontal foot velocities natu-
rally lead to higher sliding penalties. Therefore, the observed difference reflects expanded behavioral
coverage rather than degraded gait stability.
Detailed Locomotion Performance.
Figure 5 reports performance across 17 velocity-tracking
tasks. For moderate velocity commands, all methods obtain reasonable returns. However, for high-
velocity tasks, all baselines suffer noticeable performance degradation. This phenomenon is con-
sistent with the replay buffer distribution shown in Section D, where naive online FB training (FB
baseline) progressively concentrates data in low-velocity regions. This distributional shrinkage leads
to insufficient coverage of high-speed behaviors and limits zero-shot performance to boundary ve-
locity tasks. By contrast, FB-MEBE expands the replay buffer coverage tencouraging exploration in
sparsely visited velocity regions. Consequently, FB-MEBE maintains strong performance even on
boundary tasks, demonstrating improved downstream performance.
[vx=-1.5, vy=0.0, wz=0.0]
[vx=-1.0, vy=0.0, wz=0.0]
[vx=-0.5, vy=-0.5, wz=0.0]
[vx=-0.5, vy=0.0, wz=0.0]
[vx=-0.5, vy=0.5, wz=0.0]
[vx=0.0, vy=-1.0, wz=0.0]
[vx=0.0, vy=-0.5, wz=0.0]
[vx=0.0, vy=0.0, wz=-1.0]
[vx=0.0, vy=0.0, wz=0.0]
[vx=0.0, vy=0.0, wz=1.0]
[vx=0.0, vy=0.5, wz=0.0]
[vx=0.0, vy=1.0, wz=0.0]
[vx=0.5, vy=-0.5, wz=0.0]
[vx=0.5, vy=0.0, wz=0.0]
[vx=0.5, vy=0.5, wz=0.0]
[vx=1.0, vy=0.0, wz=0.0]
[vx=1.5, vy=0.0, wz=0.0]
0
50
100
150
200
Average Episode Return
Detailed Velocity-tracking Performance at 300K Steps
FB
FB-Critic
FB-MEBE (Beta=0)
FB-MEBE
Figure 5: Comparison of different methods under detailed locomotion command settings. Each
group on the x-axis corresponds to a target velocity command [vx, vy, ωz]. The y-axis reports the
mean episode return evaluated under the reward function (in Section E) associated with the cor-
responding target velocity. Results are averaged over 5 random seeds, and error bars denote ±
1-standard deviation.
Detailed Orientation Performance.
Figure 6 shows the performance across 12 base orientation
tracking settings. Notably, FB-MEBE demonstrates superior performance on challenging large-
angle tasks compared to baselines. This indicates enhanced exploration within the orientation be-
havior space. However, we observe that FB-MEBE achieves lower returns than baselines on small-
angle orientation tasks, including FB-critic (which could be due to the behavior regularization not
impeding exploration for orientation tasks). This suggests that FB-MEBE allocates more model
capacity towards extreme behaviors. Balancing this capacity, could be addressed through further
finetuning of the exploration ratio.
Hardware Tests.
We deploy FB-MEBE on a real Unitree Go2 robot and evaluate it on both loco-
motion and orientation control tasks. To facilitate real-world control, commands are issued through
a joystick interface, and the robot is guided by a composite reward function (details in Section E)
that simultaneously regulates velocity, base orientation, and base height.
9
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
[pitch=0.0, roll=-15.0]
[pitch=0.0, roll=0.0]
[pitch=-15.0, roll=0.0]
[pitch=15.0, roll=0.0]
[pitch=0.0, roll=15.0]
[pitch=0.0, roll=-45.0]
[pitch=0.0, roll=45.0]
[pitch=-45.0, roll=45.0]
[pitch=-45.0, roll=-45.0]
[pitch=0.0, roll=60.0]
[pitch=45.0, roll=0.0]
[pitch=-45.0, roll=0.0]
0
50
100
150
200
Average Episode Return
Detailed Base Orientation Task Performance Top-12 at 300K Steps
FB
FB-Critic
FB-MEBE (Beta=0)
FB-MEBE
Figure 6: Comparison of different methods under detailed orientation command settings. Each
group on the x-axis corresponds to a target orientation command [Pitch, Roll]. We removed tasks for
which all algorithms get rewards smaller than one from the graph.
As illustrated in Figure 7, FB-MEBE enables the robot to track commanded translational velocities,
adjust pitch and roll orientations, and regulate its height. The learned policy also supports composi-
tional commands, such as walking forward while maintaining a pitch angle of 15◦, or tracking yaw
angular velocity while keeping the base height at 0.32 m.
Importantly, the resulting behaviors remain stable and natural, without exhibiting excessive action
rates or noticeable foot slippage that could destabilize the robot.
Figure 7:
FB-MEBE allows for zero-shot sim2real transfer to Unitree Go2, a commercial
quadrupedal robot.
7
Conclusion
We propose FB-MEBE, a practical online zero-shot RL algorithm that enables efficient exploration
for learning quadrupedal control. FB-MEBE addresses the undirected exploration of naive online
FB algorithm, by using an exploration strategy that guides data collection policies towards max-
imizing the entropy of the achieved behavior distribution. To constrain exploration, FB-MEBE
introduces a behavior regularizer, shaping the recovered policies towards more natural and physi-
cally plausible patterns. Through this novel yet simple approach, FB-MEBE yields policies that
can be seamlessly deployed to hardware without further finetuning. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first instantiation of fully online zero-shot RL algorithm on real robotics systems without
relying on external datasets as motion priors.
While FB-MEBE represents a principled attempt toward efficient online zero-shot RL, some lim-
itations remain. The recovered policies will struggle with downstream tasks requiring behaviors
that fall far outside from the collected dataset. Additionally, the exploration strategy is still loosely
constrained, which can occasionally lead the agent to explore extreme state configurations that are
irrelevant for downstream task of interest. A deeper theoretical understanding of the FB algorithm’s
components could provide better intuition regarding whether FB implicitly prioritizes some behav-
iors over than others. Finally, while we leveraged a useful behavior regularizer, developing more
10
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
theoretically sound ways to characterize a specific family of reward functions of interest could lead
to safer, more directed exploration in future work.
Broader Impact Statement
Our work focuses on zero-shot RL algorithms for quadrupedal control. While we recognize that
autonomous robotic systems have the potential to be deployed for harmful applications, our contri-
butions are fundamental in nature and do not directly target any specific negative use cases.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Marco Bagatella and Thomas Rupf for their valuable feedback and for helping
reviewing the manuscript. Núria Armengol is supported by the Max Planck ETH Center for Learning
Systems.
References
Siddhant Agarwal, Harshit Sikchi, Peter Stone, and Amy Zhang. Proto successor measure: Rep-
resenting the behavior space of an RL agent. In Aarti Singh, Maryam Fazel, Daniel Hsu, Si-
mon Lacoste-Julien, Felix Berkenkamp, Tegan Maharaj, Kiri Wagstaff, and Jerry Zhu (eds.),
Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 267 of Pro-
ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 566–586. PMLR, 13–19 Jul 2025. URL https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v267/agarwal25e.html.
Akhil Bagaria and George Konidaris. Option discovery using deep skill chaining. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Marco Bagatella, Matteo Pirotta, Ahmed Touati, Alessandro Lazaric, and Andrea Tirinzoni. Td-
jepa: Latent-predictive representations for zero-shot reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.00739, 2025.
Marco Bagatella, Thomas Rupf, Georg Martius, and Andreas Krause.
Soft forward-backward
representations for zero-shot reinforcement learning with general utilities.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2602.06769, 2026.
André Barreto, Will Dabney, Rémi Munos, Jonathan J Hunt, Tom Schaul, Hado P van Hasselt,
and David Silver. Successor features for transfer in reinforcement learning. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Léonard Blier, Corentin Tallec, and Yann Ollivier. Learning successor states and goal-dependent
values: A mathematical viewpoint. CoRR, abs/2101.07123, 2021. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2101.07123.
Maksim Bobrin, Ilya Zisman, Alexander Nikulin, Vladislav Kurenkov, and Dmitry Dylov.
Zero-shot adaptation of behavioral foundation models to unseen dynamics.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.13150, 2025.
Diana Borsa, André Barreto, John Quan, Daniel Mankowitz, Rémi Munos, Hado Van Hasselt,
David Silver, and Tom Schaul.
Universal successor features approximators.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1812.07626, 2018.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choroman-
ski, Tianli Ding, D Driess, A Dubey, C Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer
web knowledge to robotic control. arxiv. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
distillation, 10 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.12894.
11
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
Edoardo Cetin, Ahmed Touati, and Yann Ollivier. Finer behavioral foundation models via auto-
regressive features and advantage weighting. In Reinforcement Learning Conference 2025, 2025.
Peter Dayan. Improving generalization for temporal difference learning: The successor representa-
tion. Neural computation, 5(4):613–624, 1993.
Leander Diaz-Bone, Marco Bagatella, Jonas Hübotter, and Andreas Krause. Discover: Automated
curricula for sparse-reward reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.19850, 2025.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine.
Diversity is All You
Need: Learning Skills without a Reward Function, 2 2018.
URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/1802.06070.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Sergey Levine. C-learning: Learning to achieve
goals via recursive classification. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Carlos Florensa, David Held, Xinyang Geng, and Pieter Abbeel. Automatic goal generation for
reinforcement learning agents. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1515–1528.
PMLR, 2018.
Raj Ghugare and Benjamin Eysenbach. Normalizing Flows are Capable Models for RL, 5 2025.
URL https://www.arxiv.org/abs/2505.23527.
Steven Hansen, Will Dabney, Andre Barreto, Tom Van de Wiele, David Warde-Farley, and
Volodymyr Mnih. Fast task inference with variational intrinsic successor features. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.05030, 2019.
Physical Intelligence, Ali Amin, Raichelle Aniceto, Ashwin Balakrishna, Kevin Black, Ken Conley,
Grace Connors, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Jared DiCarlo, et al. π∗
0.6: a vla that learns
from experience. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.14759, 2025.
Scott Jeen, Tom Bewley, and Jonathan M Cullen. Zero-shot reinforcement learning from low quality
data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15178, 2023.
Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair,
Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al.
Openvla: An open-source
vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.
Auto-encoding variational bayes.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Michael Laskin, Denis Yarats, Hao Liu, Kimin Lee, Albert Zhan, Kevin Lu, Catherine Cang, Lerrel
Pinto, and Pieter Abbeel. Urlb: Unsupervised reinforcement learning benchmark. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.15191, 2021.
Yitang Li, Zhengyi Luo, Tonghe Zhang, Cunxi Dai, Anssi Kanervisto, Andrea Tirinzoni, Haoyang
Weng, Kris Kitani, Mateusz Guzek, Ahmed Touati, et al. Bfm-zero: A promptable behavioral
foundation model for humanoid control using unsupervised reinforcement learning, 2025.
Russell Mendonca, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak. Discover-
ing and achieving goals via world models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
34:24379–24391, 2021.
Mayank Mittal, Pascal Roth, James Tigue, Antoine Richard, Octi Zhang, Peter Du, Antonio Serrano-
Muñoz, Xinjie Yao, René Zurbrügg, Nikita Rudin, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Milad Rakhsha, Alain
Denzler, Eric Heiden, Ales Borovicka, Ossama Ahmed, Iretiayo Akinola, Abrar Anwar, Mark T.
Carlson, Ji Yuan Feng, Animesh Garg, Renato Gasoto, Lionel Gulich, Yijie Guo, M. Gussert, Alex
Hansen, Mihir Kulkarni, Chenran Li, Wei Liu, Viktor Makoviychuk, Grzegorz Malczyk, Hammad
Mazhar, Masoud Moghani, Adithyavairavan Murali, Michael Noseworthy, Alexander Poddubny,
12
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
Nathan Ratliff, Welf Rehberg, Clemens Schwarke, Ritvik Singh, James Latham Smith, Bingjie
Tang, Ruchik Thaker, Matthew Trepte, Karl Van Wyk, Fangzhou Yu, Alex Millane, Vikram Ra-
masamy, Remo Steiner, Sangeeta Subramanian, Clemens Volk, CY Chen, Neel Jawale, Ash-
win Varghese Kuruttukulam, Michael A. Lin, Ajay Mandlekar, Karsten Patzwaldt, John Welsh,
Huihua Zhao, Fatima Anes, Jean-Francois Lafleche, Nicolas Moënne-Loccoz, Soowan Park, Rob
Stepinski, Dirk Van Gelder, Chris Amevor, Jan Carius, Jumyung Chang, Anka He Chen, Pablo
de Heras Ciechomski, Gilles Daviet, Mohammad Mohajerani, Julia von Muralt, Viktor Reut-
skyy, Michael Sauter, Simon Schirm, Eric L. Shi, Pierre Terdiman, Kenny Vilella, Tobias Wid-
mer, Gordon Yeoman, Tiffany Chen, Sergey Grizan, Cathy Li, Lotus Li, Connor Smith, Rafael
Wiltz, Kostas Alexis, Yan Chang, David Chu, Linxi "Jim" Fan, Farbod Farshidian, Ankur Handa,
Spencer Huang, Marco Hutter, Yashraj Narang, Soha Pouya, Shiwei Sheng, Yuke Zhu, Miles
Macklin, Adam Moravanszky, Philipp Reist, Yunrong Guo, David Hoeller, and Gavriel State.
Isaac lab: A gpu-accelerated simulation framework for multi-modal robot learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2511.04831, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.04831.
Seohong Park, Tobias Kreiman, and Sergey Levine. Foundation policies with hilbert representations.
In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 39737–39761,
2024a.
Seohong Park, Oleh Rybkin, and Sergey Levine.
METRA: Scalable Unsupervised RL with
Metric-Aware Abstraction, March 2024b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08887.
arXiv:2310.08887.
Matteo Pirotta, Andrea Tirinzoni, Ahmed Touati, Alessandro Lazaric, and Yann Ollivier. Fast im-
itation via behavior foundation models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2024.
Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, Stephen Zhao, Bradly Stadie, and Jimmy Ba. Maximum entropy gain
exploration for long horizon multi-goal reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pp. 7750–7761. PMLR, 2020.
Vitchyr H. Pong, Murtaza Dalal, Steven Lin, Ashvin Nair, Shikhar Bahl, and Sergey Levine. Skew-
Fit: State-Covering Self-Supervised Reinforcement Learning, 3 2019. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/1903.03698.
Danilo Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing flows. In Interna-
tional conference on machine learning, pp. 1530–1538. PMLR, 2015.
Thomas Rupf, Marco Bagatella, Marin Vlastelica, and Andreas Krause. Optimistic task inference
for behavior foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.20264, 2025.
Younggyo Seo, Carmelo Sferrazza, Haoran Geng, Michal Nauman, Zhao-Heng Yin, and Pieter
Abbeel. FastTD3: Simple, fast, and capable reinforcement learning for humanoid control, 5
2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.22642.
Archit Sharma, Michael Ahn, Sergey Levine, Vikash Kumar, Karol Hausman, and Shixiang Gu.
Emergent real-world robotic skills via unsupervised off-policy reinforcement learning. CoRR,
abs/2004.12974, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.12974.
Harshit Sikchi, Andrea Tirinzoni, Ahmed Touati, Yingchen Xu, Anssi Kanervisto, Scott Niekum,
Amy Zhang, Alessandro Lazaric, and Matteo Pirotta. Fast Adaptation with Behavioral Foundation
Models, April 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.07896. arXiv:2504.07896 [cs].
Jingbo Sun, Songjun Tu, qichao Zhang, Haoran Li, Xin Liu, Yaran Chen, Ke Chen, and Dongbin
Zhao. Unsupervised zero-shot reinforcement learning via dual-value forward-backward represen-
tation, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=0QnKnt411O.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1998.
13
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
Andrea Tirinzoni, Ahmed Touati, Jesse Farebrother, Mateusz Guzek, Anssi Kanervisto, Yingchen
Xu, Alessandro Lazaric, and Matteo Pirotta. Zero-shot whole-body humanoid control via behav-
ioral foundation models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, 2025.
Ahmed Touati and Yann Ollivier. Learning one representation to optimize all rewards. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:13–23, 2021.
Ahmed Touati, Jérémy Rapin, and Yann Ollivier. Does zero-shot reinforcement learning exist? In
The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Núria Armengol Urpí, Marin Vlastelica, Georg Martius, and Stelian Coros. Epistemically-guided
forward-backward exploration. In Reinforcement Learning Conference 2025, 2025.
14
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
Supplementary Materials
The following content was not necessarily subject to peer review.
A
Algorithm Details
Following prior work on Forward-Backward (FB) representations (Touati et al., 2023), we include
two additional regularization losses to stabilize FB training. First, we adopt an orthonormality regu-
larization on the backward representation ΣB = E

B(s)B(s)⊤
, which encourages the covariance
of B(s) to approach the identity matrix. This regularization prevents the backward representation
from collapsing and improves the conditioning of the learned embedding space. Second, we intro-
duce a temporal-difference regularization loss on the forward map that encourages F(s, a, z)⊤z to
approximate the action-value function corresponding to the reward induced by B(s)⊤Σ−1
B z. This
loss encourages the forward representation to capture directions in the latent space that are relevant
for policy optimization. See (Touati et al., 2023) (Appendix B) for more details.
B
Practical Exploration
To improve exploration efficiency in this setting, we discard states where the robot pitch or roll
exceeds 21.5◦. These states typically correspond to failure events such as falling, which can produce
large velocities unrelated to meaningful locomotion behaviors. Filtering such degenerate transitions
helps focus exploration on valid locomotion regimes.
C
Ablation Tests
C.1
Ablation Study on β.
Figure 8 presents the ablation results with different inverse-density coefficients β. When β = 0,
corresponding to uniform latent sampling without density reweighting, both entropy and task reward
remain relatively low. As β increases, entropy and reward consistently improve.
These results confirm that inverse-density reweighting effectively increases the entropy of the
achieved behavior distribution and mitigates replay buffer occupancy collapse during online training.
FB-MEBE (Beta=0)
FB-MEBE (Beta=1)
FB-MEBE
Group
0
10
20
30
40
50
Mean Reward at t=300k
Reward and Entropy Comparison (t=300k)
Reward
Entropy
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Mean Entropy at t=300k
Figure 8: Comparison between different betas on FB-MEBE on locomotion tasks
C.2
Ablation study on sampling strategy
We evaluate a version of FB-MEBE (FB-MEBE-abl), that performs an ablation on the sampling
strategy used for training the FB representations. FB-MEBE uses the same sampling strategy
15
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
10
20
30
Step (x10000)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Normalized Mean Return
Locomotion Comparison
10
20
30
Step (x10000)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Normalized Mean Return
Orientation Comparison
FB-MEBE
FB-MEBE-(abl)
Figure 9: Comparison on velocity-tracking tasks between FB-MEBE and an ablation FB-MEBE-
abl leveraging different sampling strategies for training the FB algorithm
for reward embeddings used for data collection (0.8zexp + 0.2zrandom) and the reward embedding
used for training FB representations. Here, we compare with an alternative version which only
uses our strategy for data collection, and uses (0.8zgoal reaching + 0.2zrandom for training. The later
is analogous to the exploration strategy FB-MEBE(β = 0) uses. While FB-MEBE puts more
emphasis on learning FB representations and policies for low visitation behaviors and might hence
learn better policies useful for exploration,FB-MEBE-abl samples exploration behaviors uniformly
from the replay buffer. While these two approaches are different in nature, in practice we do not find
significant differences as can be seen in Figure 9. Extensive evaluation on different mixing ratios
can also bring more insights on better sampling alternatives.
D
Replay buffer data distribution
Figure 10: Velocity [vx, vy] distribution of FB replay buffer at different training step. The color
represents the density of data points.
16
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
E
Task Reward Function
Let v ∈R3 and ωz ∈R denote the current base linear velocity and yaw angular velocity,
respectively, h ∈R denote the current base height and let g ∈R3 denote the projected gravity
vector. The corresponding command targets are denoted by v∗, ω∗
z, h∗, and g∗.
We define the tracking errors as
ev = ∥v −v∗∥2,
(12)
eω = |ωz −ω∗
z|,
(13)
eg = ∥g −g∗∥2
(14)
eh = ∥h −h∗∥2.
(15)
The individual reward terms are computed using Gaussian-shaped functions:
rv = exp

−
 ev
0.3
2
,
(16)
rω = exp

−
 eω
0.2
2
,
(17)
rg = exp

−
 eg
0.1
2
,
(18)
rh = exp

−
 eh
0.05
2
.
(19)
The locomotion and orientation task reward is defined as follows:
rlocomotion = rv · rω · rg
(20)
rorientation = rg · rh
(21)
The reward for sim-to-real transfer is defined by multiplication of all terms:
rsim2real = rv · rω · rg · rh
(22)
F
Regularization rewards
We provide the mathematical definitions of the regularization reward. Let Nj denote the number of
actuated joints and Nf the number of feet. At time step t, let ¨qt ∈RNj be the joint acceleration vec-
tor, at ∈RNj be the action vector, and at−1 be the previous action. For each foot i ∈{1, . . . , Nf},
let ht,i be its vertical position (world frame), and vxy
i,t ∈R2 be its horizontal linear velocity (world
frame).
Joint acceleration penalty.
The joint-acceleration penalty is defined as the squared ℓ2 norm of
the joint acceleration vector:
rjoint_acc = ∥¨qt∥2
2 =
Nj
X
k=1
(¨qt,k)2 .
(23)
17
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
Action rate penalty.
The action-rate penalty discourages abrupt changes between consecutive
actions:
raction_rate = ∥at −at−1∥2
2 =
Nj
X
k=1
(at,k −at−1,k)2 .
(24)
Feet slippage.
The feet-slide penalty penalizes horizontal foot motion during ground contact. A
binary contact indicator ct,i is defined as
ct,i =
(
1,
if ht,i > hfeet_contact,
0,
otherwise.
(25)
rfeet_slide =
Nf
X
i=1
ct,i ∥vxy
t,i∥2.
(26)
Total typical regularization reward.
In our experiments, the regularization reward used to train
the critic is:
rreg = −2.5 × 10−7 rjoint_acc −0.1 raction_rate −0.1 rfeet_slide
(27)
G
Regularized Exploration.
We use critic Qreg(s, a) to estimate the long-term return of the barrier regularization reward rreg
defined in Section F. Given tuples (s, a, rreg, s′) sampled from the replay buffer, we train the regu-
larization critic by minimizing a standard temporal-difference (TD) loss:
Lcritic(Qreg) = E(s,a,s′)∼ρ,a′∼πz(s′)
h Qreg(s, a) −
 rreg + γ ¯Qreg(s′, a′)
2i
(28)
Therefore, to pretrain FB agent and learn good gait at the same time, we have the following actor
loss:
Lactor(π) = −Ez∼ν, s∼ρ, a∼πz(s)
h
QFB(s, a, z) + λreg Qreg(s, a)
i
(29)
18
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
H
Simulation Setup
Joint Control
We employ joint position control as the low-level control interface. The joint con-
figuration of the robot in the standing pose is defined as the nominal joint position qnom. The policy
outputs joint position offsets a, which are scaled by a factor s and added to the nominal configuration
to obtain the target joint positions
qtarget = qnom + s · a.
(30)
The target joint positions are tracked using a PD controller
τ = Kp(qtarget −q) + Kd( ˙qtarget −˙q),
(31)
where q and ˙q denote the current joint positions and velocities.
Table 1: Joint Control Parameters
Parameter
Value
Action Scale
0.5
Proportional Gain Kp
25.0
Derivative Gain Kd
0.5
Control Frequency [Hz]
50Hz
Table 2: Domain Randomization
Parameter
Range
Friction Coefficient
U([0.5, 1.5])
Base COM Offset [m]
U([−0.05, 0.05])
Base Mass perturbation [kg]
U([−2.0, 2.0])
Link Mass Offset [m]
U([−0.01, 0.01])
Link Mass perturbation [kg]
U([−0.2, 0.2])
Default Joint Pos [rad]
U([−0.3, 0.3])
Table 3: Additive Observation Noise
Observation
Range
v [m/s]
U([−0.1, 0.1])
ω [rad/s]
U([−0.2, 0.2])
grav
U([−0.05, 0.05])
q [rad]
U([−0.01, 0.01])
˙q [rad/s]
U([−0.15, 0.15])
Domain Randomization and Observation Noise
I
Observation Space
Network
Obs Dimension Breakdown
Critic (F)
[v3, ω3, g3, hbase,1, q12, ˙q12]
B
[v3, ω3, g3, hbase,1]
Actor
[v3, ω3, g3, q12, ˙q12, a12]
Critic (Reg)
[v3, ω3, g3, hbase,1, q12, ˙q12, a12, hfeet,4, Ffeet,4]
Table 4: Inputs for different networks
The subscripts represent the dimension of this variable. v is the base linear velocity, ω is the base angular velocity, g is the
projected gravity vector, hbase is the base height, q and ˙q are joint positions and joint velocities, respectively, a is the last
action, hfoot denotes foot heights (4 feet), and Ffeet denotes foot contact forces (4 feet). ∗.
19
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
Note on B mapping: We note that the B representation acts on a lower-dimensional projection of
the full state space instead. When dealing with high dimensionality environments, learning future
probabilities for all states is difficult and generally requires large d to accommodate for all possible
rewards. In general, we are often interested in rewards that depend not on the full state but on a
projection of it. If this is known in advance, the representation B can be trained on that part of
the state only, with same theoretical guarantees (Appendix, Theorem 4 (Touati & Ollivier, 2021)).
Hence, we leverage an environment-dependent feature map ϑ : S →G, and learn B(g) instead of
B(s), where g = ϑ(s). Importantly, rewards can be arbitrary functions of g. This was also suggested
in (Touati & Ollivier, 2021).
J
Hyper-parameters
Hyperparameter
Value
Number of training steps
150k
Number of parallel environments
2048
Number of rollout steps between each agent update
10
Number of gradient steps per agent update
10
Policy delay (TD3 actor update interval)
2
Number of initial steps with random actions
1000
Number of samples for task inference
100k
Replay buffer size
4M
Batch size
4096
Discount factor
0.98
z update step interval
100
z dimension d
50
z distribution ν
-uniform on unit sphere
20%
-goals from online buffer
80%
Coefficient for orthonormality loss
100
Coefficient for Fz-regularization loss
0.1
Regularization coefficient λreg
20
Table 5: Training hyperparameters
Hyperparameter
Critic (F)
B
Critic (Reg)
Actor
Learning Rate
5 · 10−5
5 · 10−5
5 · 10−5
5 · 10−5
Soft update coefficient
0.01
0.01
0.005
0.01
Input Variables
(s, a, z)
(s)
(s, a)
(s, z)
Output Dim
d
d
1
12
Embedding Hidden Units
1024
–
–
1024
Feed Forward Hidden Layers
2
2
4
2
Feed Forward Hidden Units
1024
512
1024
1024
Activations
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
Number of Parallel Networks
2
1
2
1
Table 6: Network hyperparameters
20
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
Table 7: Hyperparameters of the Normalizing Flow.
Hyperparameter
Value
Flow architecture
RealNVP-style normalizing flow
Number of coupling layers
10
Hidden dimension
64
Activation function
ReLU
Scale output activation
Tanh
Masking strategy
Alternating checkerboard / channel mask
Base distribution
Standard Gaussian N(0, I)
Learning rate
1 · 10−3
Batch size
256
Training epochs
30
Goal buffer size
10k
Table 8: Hyperparameters of reverse sampling.
Hyperparameter
Value
normallizing flow update frequency
1000 steps
sample buffer size
100k
ϵ (for stability)
0.1
β (reverse sampling strength)
2.0
Normalizing Flow and Reverse Sampling
K
Connection to Universal Successor Features
Given a feature map ϕ : S →Rd that embeds states into d-dimensional features, the successor
features (Barreto et al., 2017) for policy π are defined as Φπ(s, a) = E
 P
t≥0 γtϕ(st+1)|s, a, π

.
Then for any reward function that can be expressed as a linear combination of the features, i.e.,
r(s) = z⊤ϕ(s), where z ∈Rd are the weights, the Q-function can be expressed as: Qπ
r (s, a) =
z⊤Φπ(s, a). Universal successor features (USF) (Borsa et al., 2018), goes one step further and al-
lows not only zero-shot policy evaluation, but a generic framework for zero-shot policy optimization.
This is achieved by learning a family of policies {πz} parameterized by a latent vector z ∈Rd, such
that for each z, the policy πz is trained to be optimal with respect to reward function rz := z⊤ϕ.
Formally,
E
h X
t≥0
γtϕ(st+1)|s, a, π
i
,
πz(s) = arg max
a
Φ(s, a, z)⊤z.
(32)
There exist several instantiations of USF (Agarwal et al., 2025; Park et al., 2024a) (see (Touati et al.,
2023) for an extensive list), however, they requires a separate methods for learning features ϕ and
one for learning its successor features, usually via a TD-learning approach. In contrast, the forward
backward representation (Touati & Ollivier, 2021) provides an alternative framework for zero-shot
RL that jointly learns the features and its successor features, via a contrastive learning approach.
FB representations are closely related to successor features. In fact, F(s, a, z) is the successor
feature of policy πz of the basic features ϕ(s) = Covρ(B)−1B(s) (Touati et al., 2023), where
CovρB = E˜s∼ρ

B(˜s)B(˜s)⊤
.
After training, given a reward function r specified at test time, we can find the task embedding zr
parameterizing the optimal learnt policy for reward r, by performing a simple linear regression of
r onto the span of the learnt features B. Namely we find the weights z∗
r (coordinates of the feature
21
Maximum Entropy Behavior Exploration for Sim2Real Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
basis) that minimize z∗
r = arg minz Es∼ρ
 (r(s) −z⊤
r ϕ(s)
2] = Covρ(ϕ)−1E˜s∼ρ

ϕ(s)r(s)

. For
FB, the reward embedding can be computed simply via zr = Es∼ρ

B(s)r(s)

(Touati & Ollivier,
2021), where the expectation is approximated through sampling from the dataset distribution used
for training (or a subset).
22
