Insights on back marking for the automated identification of animals∗
D. Brunner1,2,†, M. Bordes3, E. Mayrhuber1,2, S. M. Winkler1, V. Dorfer1 and M. Oczak3,4
1Bioinformatics Research Group, PLFDoc, University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria,
Hagenberg, Austria
2Computer Vision Lab, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
3Centre for Animal Nutrition and Welfare, The University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Vienna,
Austria
4Precision Livestock Farming Hub, The University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Vienna, Austria
†david.brunner@fh-hagenberg.at
Abstract
To date, there is little research on how to design back marks to best support individual-level
monitoring of uniform looking species like pigs. With the recent surge of machine learning-based
monitoring solutions, there is a particular need for guidelines on the design of marks that can be
effectively recognised by such algorithms. This study provides valuable insights on effective back
mark design, based on the analysis of a machine learning model, trained to distinguish pigs via
their back marks. Specifically, a neural network of type ResNet-50 was trained to classify ten pigs
with unique back marks. The analysis of the model’s predictions highlights the significance of
certain design choices, even in controlled settings. Most importantly, the set of back marks must
be designed such that each mark remains unambiguous under conditions of motion blur, diverse
view angles and occlusions, caused by animal behaviour. Further, the back mark design must
consider data augmentation strategies commonly employed during model training, like colour,
flip and crop augmentations. The generated insights can support individual-level monitoring in
future studies and real-world applications by optimizing back mark design.
Keywords. precision livestock farming, computer vision, identification, back marks, pigs
1
Introduction
Observing animals is a well-established way of gathering information about their social behaviour [1].
While, traditionally, this is done by a human expert, in recent years, motivated by advancements in
machine learning (ML), much research has been devoted to the development of automatic monitoring
solutions. A plethora of studies show ML to be capable of accurately detecting, tracking, and
ultimately recognising the behaviour of animals [3]. One obstacle towards practical application is
the fact that many of the presented methods work on group level and do not allow the identification
of individual animals. This is in large part because differentiating individual animals is a very hard
problem in general, and especially so for uniform looking species like pigs. One common solution
is to use additional physical markers like back marks. To date, there are only few studies that
provide insights on their design [4]. The aim of this study is to provide insights on back mark design
for automated identification of animals. To this end, a machine learning model that is trained to
recognise pigs via their unique back marks is analysed to unveil interesting error cases and to allow
deriving design recommendations.
∗This is a preprint. The final version will be published in the conference proceedings of the 12th European
Conference on Precision Livestock Farming (ECPLF) 2026.
1
arXiv:2603.25535v1  [cs.CV]  26 Mar 2026
2
Material and Methods
2.1
Experimental setup and back marks
The data was collected during an observational study on social behaviour in pigs, with a focus on
helping behaviour (“Let me out”, doi:10.55776/I6488). The study setup comprised two identical pens,
observed by identical cameras (HIKVISION DS 2CD5046G0-AP, 1200x780@25, fisheye, Hikvision
Co. Ltd., Hangzhou, Zhejiang) mounted in an elevated side-view angle. To support individual
identification the pigs received regular back marks. Symbols were used instead of numbers for
practicality (easy to apply to moving pigs) and reproducibility (similar across reapplications). The
back marks were inspired by patterns used in mice [4]. Figure 1 shows the back marks.
Figure 1: The back marks used in this study. From left to right: dot dot, dot line horizontal, i, line
line horizontal, o, reverse t, s, v, vertical line, x.
2.2
Data preparation and model training
A human labeller placed bounding boxes with class IDs on all frames of 11 video clips, each 10-30
seconds in duration. Nine of the clips were selected for the training set, and two of the clips for
the validation and test set, respectively. The raw training set then amounted to a total of 3750
frames, the validation and test set to 250 and 750 frames, of which the bounding box areas were
then algorithmically extracted and manually filtered. The final training set comprised 26,260 crops,
the validation and the test set were reduced to 500 crops, respectively. A PyTorch1 implementation
of a neural network of type ResNet-50 [2] was selected as the image classification model. Extensive
data augmentation was used in training, including horizontal and vertical flipping, random rotation,
brightness, contrast, saturation and hue modifications, as well as a small probability for switching
to grayscale and applying blurring.
3
Results and Discussion
The trained model reached a classification accuracy of 91% and 69% on validation and test set,
respectively. There were conspicuous differences across classes (e.g. vertical line: 88% vs. reverse
t: 38% on the test set), which are mostly consistent between validation and test set. Especially
reverse t poses a challenge for the model, which might be explained by the fact that it is prone
to look similar to other back marks in specific situations, which are often tied to specific types of
animal behaviour. In this study, three kinds of behaviour were identified as especially relevant: fast
movement, diverse poses and proximity to other animals, which can lead to motion blur, diverse
1https://pytorch.org/
2
view angles and occlusions, respectively. The top line in Fig. 2 illustrates how motion blur can
cause reverse t to look like vertical line. The pixel importance [5] shows that the blurred vertical
bar of the T does not factor into the model’s decision. The middle line in Fig. 2 illustrates how a
certain view angle can cause reverse t to look more like v or x which is reflected in both the model
confidence and the pixel importance. The bottom line of Fig. 2 shows how even minor occlusions
can make it impossible for the model to distinguish between line line horizontal and o. Back marks
must be chosen, such that these situations are avoided.
Figure 2: Behaviour-based error cases. From top to bottom: motion blur, angle, occlusion.
Data augmentation has established itself as an indispensable tool for improving ML models
and is ubiquitous in practice. The back mark design needs to consider common photometrical
augmentations like colour, brightness and contrast adjustments, as well as geometrical augmentations
like cropping and flipping. Fig. 3a shows colour jitter (left) and grayscale (right), both of which
might interfere with coloured back marks. Fig. 3b shows how crop augmentation makes it impossible
to distinguish reverse t from vertical line (left) and line line horizontal from o (right). Fig. 3c
illustrates why back marks that are mirror images of each other must be avoided in the presence
of flip augmentation. In this example an instance of class s (left) looks like it belongs to class 2
(middle; only for demonstration, not part of the set of back marks in this study) after a horizontal
flip (right).
4
Conclusions
This study aimed at investigating back mark design for identification tasks in automated animal
monitoring. It could be shown that there are important design choices that impact a ML model’s
ability to successfully differentiate a set of back marks. Specifically, the insights of the study are
3
Figure 3: Illustration of common augmentation strategies and their impact on back mark choice. a)
colour augmentation, b) cropping, c) flipping.
twofold. First, the back mark design should control for predictable animal behaviour such as fast
movement, diverse poses and proximity to other animals. Second, to ensure the data’s compatibility
with a wide range of ML methods, the back mark design should consider common data augmentation
strategies applied during model training such as colour, and flip augmentations.
Acknowledgements
This research was funded in whole or in part by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) [https:
//doi.org/10.55776/DFH34]. For open access purposes, the author has applied a CC BY public
copyright license to any author-accepted manuscript version arising from this submission. The data
used in this study originates from the "Let me out" project, funded by the Austrian Science Fund
(FWF) [https://doi.org/10.55776/I6488].
References
[1] Caroline Clouard, Auriane Foreau, Sébastien Goumon, Céline Tallet, Elodie Merlot, and Rémi
Resmond. Evidence of stable preferential affiliative relationships in the domestic pig. Animal
Behaviour, 213:95–105, 2024.
[2] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 770–778, 2016.
[3] Dong Liu, Maciej Oczak, Kristina Maschat, Johannes Baumgartner, Bernadette Pletzer, Dongjian
He, and Tomas Norton. A computer vision-based method for spatial-temporal action recognition
of tail-biting behaviour in group-housed pigs. Biosystems Engineering, 195:27–41, 2020.
[4] Shay Ohayon, Ofer Avni, Adam L Taylor, Pietro Perona, and SE Roian Egnor. Automated
multi-day tracking of marked mice for the analysis of social behaviour. Journal of neuroscience
methods, 219(1):10–19, 2013.
[5] Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
European conference on computer vision, pages 818–833. Springer, 2014.
4
