The impact of sensor placement on
graph-neural-network-based leakage
detection ⋆
J.J.H.v.Gemert ∗V. Breschi ∗D.R. Yntema ∗∗
K.J. Keesman ∗∗∗M. Lazar ∗
∗Control Systems Group, Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven
University of Technology, 5600MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
(e-mail: J.J.H.v.Gemert@tue.nl).
∗∗Wetsus, Centre of Excellence for Sustainable Water Technology,
8900MA Leeuwarden, The Netherlands.
∗∗∗Mathematical and Statistical Methods – Biometris, Wageningen
University, 6708PB Wageningen, the Netherlands
Abstract: Sensor placement for leakage detection in water distribution networks is an important
and practical challenge for water utilities. Recent work has shown that graph neural networks
can estimate and predict pressures and detect leaks, but their performance strongly depends on
the available sensor measurements and configurations. In this paper, we investigate how sensor
placement influences the performance of GNN-based leakage detection. We propose a novel
PageRank-Centrality-based sensor placement method and demonstrate that it substantially
impacts reconstruction, prediction, and leakage detection on the EPANET Net1.
Keywords: Sensor placement, Water resource system modeling and control, graph neural
networks, leakage detection, PageRank centrality.
1. INTRODUCTION
Leakages in water distribution networks (WDNs) can lead
to considerable water losses, increased operational costs,
and infrastructure damage. Beyond these financial and
structural impacts, leakages may also pose public-health
risks due to the potential ingress of contaminants (Xu
et al., 2014). These challenges are becoming even more
pressing as water scarcity becomes an increasing prob-
lem under the effects of climate change, highlighting the
need for effective leakage detection and leakage reduction
strategies (Annaswamy et al., 2024; Qi et al., 2024). In this
context, effective leakage detection is a critical concern for
many water utilities, which typically rely on two estab-
lished methods. The first is Minimum Night Flow (MNF)
analysis, which assumes that night-time demand is low and
predictable, thus any significant increase in flow during
these hours can be interpreted as a leakage (AL-Washali
et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2022). However, such assumptions
often do not hold in practice due to irregular demand
patterns, which can limit the reliability of MNF-based
detection. The second approach is model-based residual
⋆This work was performed in the cooperation framework of Wetsus,
European Centre of Excellence for Sustainable Water Technology
(www.wetsus.nl). Wetsus is co-funded by the European Union (Hori-
zon Europe, LIFE, Interreg and EDRF), the Province of Fryslân and
the Dutch Government: Ministry of Economic Affairs (TTT, SBO &
PPS-I/TKI Water Technology), Ministry of Education, Culture and
Science (TTT & SBO) and Ministry of Infrastructure and Water
Management (National Growth Fund - UPPWATER). The authors
like to thank the participants of the research theme “Smart Water
Grids” for the fruitful discussions and their financial support.
analysis, in which measured and reconstructed pressures
are compared with predicted pressures obtained from hy-
draulic models such as EPANET or InfoWorks (Hu et al.,
2021). A leak is indicated when the resulting residuals,
i.e., the difference between reconstructed and predicted
pressures, exceed a predefined threshold. The reliability of
this method depends strongly on model quality, which in
turn relies on accurate real-time data, demand estimates,
and hydraulic parameter values. Thus, uncertainties in
any of these key factors can significantly influence leakage
detection performance.
These challenges have motivated interest in learning-based
methods that reconstruct pressures directly from sen-
sor measurements and do not depend on accurate hy-
draulic parameters. More specifically, graph neural net-
works (GNNs) have gained attention, as they exploit the
WDN’s graph topology to learn how pressure propagates
through the network, enabling reconstruction at unob-
served junctions even with only a few sensors (Hajgató
et al., 2021). Several GNN architectures have been ex-
plored in this context, including spectral methods such
as ChebNet (Hajgató et al., 2021) and hierarchical graph
networks such as the graph U-Net in (Truong et al., 2024).
Neural networks have also been applied directly to leak-
age detection. Examples include the ANN-based pipeline
leakage diagnosis in (Pérez-Pérez et al., 2021), which
detects leak-induced pressure disturbances from sensor
data, and the GNN reconstructor–predictor framework in
(Garðarsson et al., 2022), which identifies leaks by compar-
ing reconstructed and one-step-ahead predicted pressures.
Despite these advances, the effectiveness of such GNN-
arXiv:2603.24076v1  [cs.LG]  25 Mar 2026
based methods still depends on a fundamental factor: the
underlying sensor configuration of the network. In most
existing works, the sensor layout is fixed a priori or chosen
randomly (Garðarsson et al., 2022), and its influence on
reconstruction accuracy, prediction performance, or the
overall leakage-detection process is not explicitly exam-
ined. However, this part is critical, as the informativeness
of the pressure measurements, and thereby the overall per-
formance, is intrinsically tied to the sensor configuration.
Sensor placement for leakage detection has been widely
studied in both industry and academia. In practice, util-
ities often rely on simulation-based methods, where dif-
ferent sensor configurations are evaluated against a set
of explored simulated leak scenarios (Santos-Ruiz et al.,
2022; Romero-Ben et al., 2022). These approaches target
leakage detection and reflect realistic operating conditions.
However, their performance is limited to the finite set
of simulated scenarios, and they do not provide formal
guarantees. To address this, recent works have explored
observability theory as a basis for sensor placement. In this
framework, ensuring observability guarantees that pres-
sures at unmeasured junctions can be reconstructed from
the available sensor data over a finite time. For example,
approaches such as (Geelen et al., 2021; Bopardikar, 2021)
aim to maximize leak detectability by maximizing the
“degree” of observability. These methods, however, require
accurate hydraulic parameters, demand patterns, and full
model knowledge, which can be difficult to obtain in prac-
tice. To overcome this challenge, recent work has proposed
structural observability–based sensor placement methods
that rely solely on the WDN topology and guarantee
observability without requiring any hydraulic information
(van Gemert et al., 2025a,b). While effective, the result-
ing sensor configurations are often conservative and may
demand more sensors than is feasible in practice given
installation and cost constraints.
Given the above challenges, this paper proposes a novel,
scalable, topology-based, and model-free sensor placement
method based on PageRank Centrality. We examine how
the resulting PageRank-Centrality-based sensor placement
fits with the ChebNet reconstructor–predictor framework
and how it affects pressure reconstruction, one-step pre-
diction, and residual-based leakage detection. Using the
EPANET Net1 benchmark, we compare this approach
with an arbitrary configuration and evaluate the influence
of sensor placement on reconstruction accuracy, prediction
performance, and leakage detection.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Sec-
tion 2 introduces the necessary preliminaries, including
basic graph-theoretic concepts, the WDN setting, and the
problem formulation. Section 3 presents the main con-
tributions, starting with the PageRank-Centrality-based
sensor placement, followed by the ChebNet reconstruc-
tor–predictor framework for pressure reconstruction and
one-step prediction, and the associated residual-based
leakage detection mechanism. Section 4 evaluates the ap-
proach on the EPANET Net1 benchmark. Finally, Section
5 summarizes the findings and outlines directions for fu-
ture research.
Basic notation: Let R denote the field of real numbers,
and let R≥0 and R>0 denote the sets of non-negative and
positive reals, respectively. For a vector x ∈Rn, xi denotes
its i-th element, and 1n ∈Rn denotes the vector of all ones.
For a matrix A ∈Rn×n, A−1 denotes its inverse, and aij
the element on row i and column j. The n × n identity
matrix is denoted by In.
2. PRELIMINARIES AND PROBLEM STATEMENT
In this section, we introduce the basic graph-theoretic
concepts that provide the foundations for the sensor place-
ment algorithm, GNNs, and WDN modeling, along with
the general WDN setting and the problem formulation.
2.1 Basic graph notions & WDNs
In this paper, we consider only undirected and unweighted
graphs. A graph is undirected if every edge is bidirectional,
i.e., an edge from node i to node j implies an edge from
j to i, and it is unweighted if all edge weights are equal
to 1. We define a graph as G = (V, E), where V = {vi}n
i=1
is the set of nodes, and E = {ek}m
k=1 is the set of edges.
The adjacency matrix A ∈Rn×n represents the topology
of such a graph, where
aij =
(
1,
if edge ek connects vi and vj,
0,
otherwise.
(1)
Given the adjacency matrix, the out-degree and in-degree
of a node vi are defined as
dout
i
=
n
X
j=1
aij,
din
i =
n
X
j=1
aji.
For an undirected graph, we have that aij = aji for all
node pairs (i, j). As a consequence, the in-degree and out-
degree of each node coincide, and we simply write
din
i = dout
i
= di =
n
X
j=1
aij,
whose values form the diagonal entries of the degree matrix
D = diag(d1, . . . , dn).
(2)
The graph Laplacian is then defined as
L = D −A,
(3)
and captures how each node relates to its neighbors and its
connectivity. Because of this structural role, the Laplacian
is central to spectral GNNs and forms the foundation of
the Chebyshev graph convolutions used later in this paper.
Fig. 1. Illustration of EPANET Net1 WDN consisting of
two reservoirs/tanks (black icons), one pump (black
circle), and junctions (blue circles) connected through
pipes (blue lines).
Fig. 2. Processing pipeline from WDN topology to Chebnet input.
Before formulating the problem, we first describe the
WDN setting in which it is posed. A WDN is an infrastruc-
ture system that delivers pressurized drinking water from
supply sources to consumers through an interconnected
pipe network. A WDN typically consists of reservoirs and
tanks that provide hydraulic head, pumps that maintain
pressure, pipes that transport water, and junctions where
water is distributed towards consumer demands. An illus-
tration of a small WDN is shown in Fig. 1. The topology
of this network can be represented by an adjacency matrix
of the form defined in (1), which captures how these
junctions, tanks, and reservoirs are linked through the pipe
network.
2.2 Problem formulation
Given a WDN such as the one illustrated in Fig. 1, we first
establish the setting for the sensor placement problem. In
practice, pressure sensors are typically installed only at
junctions, whereas tanks, reservoirs, and pumps are often
already equipped with sensors and treated as boundary
nodes within the hydraulic model. Consistent with this,
we therefore consider only junctions as candidate locations
for pressure sensors. The overall workflow of the sensor
placement pipeline is shown in Fig. 2.
Building on this setting and the challenges highlighted
in Section 1, we investigate the following question: How
can we exploit graph topology and connectivity for sensor
placements that enhance pressure reconstruction and pre-
diction accuracy, thereby improving leakage detection in
GNN-based methods?
The main problem will be addressed in three steps: (i)
a topology-based sensor placement method is introduced,
based on PageRank Centrality; (ii) a ChebNet reconstruc-
tor–predictor framework is used for pressure reconstruc-
tion and one-step prediction from the resulting sparse
measurements; and (iii) residual analysis is applied to
detect leakages by comparing reconstructed and predicted
pressures. These components are then connected through a
consistent graph construction that ensures the PageRank-
Centrality-based sensor placement and the ChebNet archi-
tecture operate on the same underlying topology.
3. MAIN RESULTS
In this section, we develop the methodology outlined
above. We first introduce a topology-based sensor place-
ment method using PageRank Centrality, which selects
an informative sparse set of sensors. We then describe
the ChebNet architecture used for pressure reconstruction
and one-step prediction (Hajgató et al., 2021), together
with the residual-based leakage detection framework from
(Garðarsson et al., 2022). Finally, we demonstrate how the
PageRank-based sensor placement aligns with the Cheb-
Net architecture through a consistent graph construction.
3.1 PageRank-Centrality-based Sensor Placement
Using the graph representation introduced in Section 2, we
now define a topology-based, model-free sensor placement
method. The approach is based on PageRank Centrality
(Brin and Page, 1998), which evaluates how a simple
random walk moves through the network. Junctions that
the random walk reaches least often are particularly inter-
esting to measure when only a small number of sensors can
be installed. Their pressure values are the most difficult
for a GNN to estimate from neighboring junctions. To
formalize this method, we express PageRank Centrality
on the WDN topology. We begin with the random-walk
transition matrix
M = AD−1,
(4)
where A is the adjacency matrix (1) and D the degree
matrix (2). The entry Mji gives the probability that a
random walker located at junction i moves to junction j
in one step. The PageRank algorithm augments this basic
random walk using a uniform vector
v = 1
n1n.
(5)
and a damping factor α ∈(0, 1), resulting in the iteration
p(k+1) = αMp(k) + (1 −α)v,
(6)
starting from p(0) = v. At each iteration, the product
Mp(k) performs a random-walk update, distributing the
current scores across neighboring junctions according to
M, while the term (1−α)v redistributes a uniform amount
across all junctions. Repeated application of (6) converges
to a unique vector p∗satisfying
p∗= (I −αM)−1(1 −α)v,
(7)
which quantifies how accessible each junction is under the
modified random walk: frequently visited junctions obtain
larger values, whereas rarely visited ones receive smaller
values.
Algorithm 1 demonstrates the resulting sensor placement
using this PageRank Centrality formulation. For a desired
number of sensors s, the algorithm constructs the degree
and transition matrices (line 1), applies the PageRank
iteration until convergence (lines 2–5), and then selects
the s junctions with the smallest PageRank values (line 6)
for the chosen sensor locations. These junctions provide an
informative sensor location, as their pressures are difficult
to estimate from neighboring measurements based on their
PageRank Centrality value.
Having defined this topology-driven sensor placement
method, we now introduce the ChebNet architecture,
which uses the resulting sparse pressure measurements to
estimate the pressures throughout the WDN.
Algorithm 1 PageRank-Centrality-based Sensor Place-
ment
Require: Adjacency matrix A ∈{0, 1}n×n, number of
sensors s, α ∈(0, 1), tolerance ε > 0.
Ensure: Sensor index set S.
1: d ←A1,
D ←diag(d),
M ←AD−1
2: p(0) ←1
n1,
v ←1
n1n
3: repeat
4:
p(k+1) ←αMp(k) + (1 −α)v
5: until ∥p(k+1) −p(k)∥2 ≤ε
6: Sort p(k+1) in ascending order and let S be the indices
of the s smallest entries return S
3.2 ChebNet Architecture for Pressure Reconstruction and
Prediction
We now introduce the ChebNet architecture, which serves
as the reconstruction–prediction model throughout this
paper. ChebNet is a spectral graph neural network that
applies Chebyshev polynomial filters to a scaled Laplacian
of the WDN topology, enabling it to learn how pressures
propagate across the junction graph from sparse measure-
ments. The graph convolution used in ChebNet begins
with the normalized Laplacian based on the Laplacian
defined in (3)
Lnorm = I −D−1/2AD−1/2.
constructed from the junction-only WDN adjacency ma-
trix A and degree matrix D. Because the eigenvalues of
Lnorm lie in [0, 2], it is rescaled
ˆL =
2
λmax
Lnorm −I,
(8)
so that its eigenvalues lie within [−1, 1], the region where
Chebyshev polynomials are numerically stable (Hajgató
et al., 2021). With this scaled operator in place, the
Chebyshev polynomials used in the convolution are defined
recursively as
T0(ˆL) = I,
T1(ˆL) = ˆL,
Tk(ˆL) = 2ˆL Tk−1(ˆL) −Tk−2(ˆL),
k ≥2.
(9)
A ChebNet layer then evaluates the truncated expansion
gΘ(ˆL)x =
K
X
k=0
Θk Tk(ˆL)x,
(10)
where K is the filter order and Θk
∈RFin×Fout are
the learnable weights. This construction lets the network
combine information across multiple hops in the junction
graph, in a way that is directly governed by the WDN
topology.
With these convolutional layers in place, we can train
ChebNet to reconstruct nodal pressures from sparse mea-
surements as follows. Let x(t) ∈Rn denote the pressure
vector at time t, and let m ∈{0, 1}n indicate the sensor
locations. The observed signal is
xobs(t) = m ⊙x(t),
(11)
where ⊙denotes the Hadamard product. From these
sparse inputs, the reconstructor learns the mapping
ˆxr(t) = fΘ(xobs(t), m),
(12)
which reconstructs the full pressure vector at time t. To
train this model, we use pressure trajectories
xT = {x(0), x(1), . . . , x(T)} ∈RN,
generated using a hydraulic simulator such as EPANET.
Applying the mask (11) yields the inputs xobs(t), and
the parameters of the reconstructor are optimized by
minimizing
Lrec(Θ) = 1
T
T
X
t=1
fΘ(xobs(t), m) −x(t)
2
2 .
(13)
This model acts as a static estimator, it reconstructs the
pressure at time t using only the measurements available
at that same instant.
To capture temporal behaviour instead of static, we extend
this architecture to a predictor that estimates x(t+1) from
a window of past measurements. To formalize this, for a
window length w ∈N we define
xw(t) =
 x(t −w + 1), x(t −w + 2), . . . , x(t)

,
xobs
w (t) = m ⊙xw(t).
The predictor learns the mapping
ˆxp(t + 1) = fϕ
 xobs
w (t), m

.
(14)
For training the predictor, let Ttr denote the set of time
indices used for one-step prediction, and let Ntr be its
cardinality. The predictor parameters are obtained by
minimizing
Lpred(ϕ)= 1
Ntr
X
t∈Ttr
fϕ
 xobs
w (t), m

−x(t + 1)
2
2.
(15)
Having both models in place, leakage detection is based
on the residuals of the reconstruction and the prediction.
We define the nodal residual
rn(t) = ˆxr(t) −ˆxp(t),
which remains small under leak-free conditions. Because
leaks occur along pipes rather than at junctions, these
nodal residuals are projected onto edges
re(t) =
rni(t) −rnj(t)
.
Finally, to reduce the effect of noise and short-term fluc-
tuations, we apply a rolling window of length mr to the
absolute edge residuals, yielding the smoothed residuals
¯re(t) =
1
mr
t
X
τ=t−mr+1
re(τ).
To detect abnormal behavior, i.e., a leak, we construct a
threshold based on the leak-free training data. Let µe and
σe denote the mean and standard deviation of ¯re(t) over
the healthy validation set. A leak alarm is raised on edge
e when
¯re(t) > µe + αaσe,
where αa > 0 is a tuning parameter that balances sensi-
tivity and false-alarm rate.
3.3 Consistent Graph Construction for PageRank and
ChebNet
To connect the PageRank-Centrality-based sensor place-
ment with the ChebNet reconstructor–predictor frame-
work, both must operate on the same underlying graph.
Following the assumptions in Section 2 and the definition
of ˆL in (8), pressure sensors are placed only at junctions,
while tanks, reservoirs, and pumps act as boundary nodes.
Extracting the junction–junction connectivity from the
Fig. 3. ChebNet architecture for pressure reconstruction and prediction in water distribution networks (WDNs).
hydraulic model results in a symmetric adjacency matrix
A ∈{0, 1}n×n, where n is the number of junctions. This
same matrix defines the transition matrix M = AD−1
used in the PageRank iteration (6), and through the
normalized and scaled Laplacian, it also determines the
ChebNet graph convolution. For example, the junction-
only adjacency matrix of the EPANET Net1 (Fig. 1) is
A =


0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
1 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0
0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 0
0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0
0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0
0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1
0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1
0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0


.
(16)
Using this unified adjacency matrix ensures full consis-
tency: the PageRank-Centrality-based sensor placement
selects junctions based on the same connectivity that de-
termines how ChebNet propagates information through its
spectral filters. PageRank uses A to drive the random-walk
dynamics, and ChebNet builds its Laplacian filters directly
from A. As a result, reconstruction, prediction, and leakage
detection all operate on a graph that is structurally aligned
with the sensor placement strategy, ensuring that sensor
placement and ChebNet filtering are fully aligned in terms
of the underlying graph structure.
4. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we compare the PageRank-Centrality-
based sensor placement with an arbitrary placement of
equal size on the EPANET Net1 network. For clarity,
the analysis is structured into three parts: (i) the sensor
placement and training setup, (ii) validation and testing of
the reconstructor and predictor, and (iii) leakage detection
under a simulated fault.
4.1 Sensor placement and training
To obtain the PageRank-centrality-based sensor place-
ment in Algorithm 1, we compute the PageRank scores of
the junction-only adjacency matrix in (16), using a damp-
ing factor αp = 0.85. Table 1 shows the resulting ranking,
ordered from lowest to highest PageRank value. Selecting
the three lowest-ranked junctions yields the sensor set
{10, 23, 32}. For comparison, we include an arbitrary
placement of the same size, chosen to have a similar spatial
distribution without overlapping sensor locations, namely
{13, 22, 31}. Note that the node identifiers in Table 1
correspond to the EPANET junction labels (as in Fig. 1),
not to the row or column indices of the adjacency matrix.
Table 1. PageRank values for Net1 in Fig. 1,
computed using A in (16) with αp = 0.85.
Node
10
23
32
13
31
21
12
11
22
p
0.056 0.092 0.092 0.093 0.093 0.132 0.132 0.139 0.1699
For each sensor configuration, we train a ChebNet recon-
structor and predictor, resulting in four GNNs in total.
Using EPANET, we generate a 108-hour dataset with a 1-
minute sampling interval (6480 samples), of which the first
60 hours are used for training, hours 60–84 for validation,
and the final 24 hours for testing. The predictor uses a
temporal window of w = 120 minutes. All GNNs use a
four-layer ChebNet architecture with Chebyshev orders
K = [48, 24, 4, 1] and channel widths F = [24, 12, 6], rep-
resenting a scaled-down but structurally consistent version
of the design used for the L-Town network in (Garðarsson
et al., 2022).
Table 2. Training and validation mean squared
errors (MSE) for the four GNNs on Net1.
GNN
Training MSE Validation MSE
Reconstructor (PageRank)
0.1452
0.1358
Reconstructor (Arbitrary)
3.910
4.407
Predictor (PageRank)
0.4092
0.6831
Predictor (Arbitrary)
2.848
3.582
Table 2 summarizes the final training and validation er-
rors for all four GNNs. The reconstructor and predic-
tor trained with the PageRank-Centrality-based sensor
placement achieve consistently lower validation errors than
those trained with arbitrary placement, indicating that the
PageRank-Centrality-based sensor configuration provides
more informative measurements. Additionally, for both
sensor configurations, the predictor results in higher errors
than the reconstructor. This behavior is also visible in
the training curves in Fig. 4. The reconstructor converges
quickly and stabilizes at a low loss with only minor fluctu-
ations, whereas the predictor shows larger oscillations and
a higher overall loss.
100
102
104
rec
(a)
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
Epoch
101
103
pred
(b)
Training loss
Validation loss
Fig. 4. Training and validation loss on a logarithmic scale
for the reconstructor (a) and predictor (b), using
PageRank-Centrality-based sensor placement.
4.2 Testing of the reconstructor and predictor
To compare the reconstruction and prediction perfor-
mance, we examine the residual distributions of all four
GNNs by showing violin plots for all junctions and for
the non-sensed junctions in Figure 5. From Figure 5,
we observe the same behaviour as in Table 2, i.e., the
PageRank-Centrality-based sensor placement yields nar-
rower and more concentrated residuals, indicating higher
reconstruction and prediction accuracy, whereas the arbi-
trary placement results in broader distributions. Addition-
ally, we again see that the predictor consistently produces
larger residuals than the reconstructor, since it must learn
one-step-ahead dynamics instead of a static mapping. This
makes the predictor more sensitive to abrupt changes in
the pressure trajectory, particularly at the demand-driven
discontinuities, which are visible in Fig. 6.
4.3 Leakage simulation setup and detection
Having established the four GNNs, we now compare both
sensor configurations in a leakage scenario. To this end,
Net1 is simulated for 30 hours with a 1-minute resolution,
and a single leak is introduced at hour 26 by activating the
0
5
10
15
(a)
0
5
10
15
(b)
Absolute error in pressure head [m]
Reconstructor – PageRank placement
Reconstructor – Arbitrary placement
Predictor – PageRank placement
Predictor – Arbitrary placement
Fig. 5. Residual distributions for the four GNNs on Net1,
shown as violin plots over all junctions in (a) and over
non-sensed junctions in (b).
115
120
125
130
135
Pressure head [m]
(a)
11
12
13
14
15
16
Time [h]
115
120
125
130
135
Pressure head [m]
(b)
10
13
23
Est 10
Est 13
Est 23
11
21
31
Est 11
Est 21
Est 31
12
22
32
Est 12
Est 22
Est 32
Fig. 6. True vs. reconstructed pressures in (a) and true vs.
one-step-ahead predictions in (b).
emitter coefficient at junction 21 (Fig. 1). This junction
is not sensed in both configurations but lies adjacent to
a junction equipped with either a PageRank-Centrality-
based sensor or an arbitrary sensor. The leak magnitude
is chosen such that the resulting head drop exceeds typical
demand-driven discontinuities (about 1.5 m), ensuring
that the event is distinguishable from normal variations.
Figure 7 shows the resulting pressure trajectories and the
corresponding pressure deviations, with the leaky junction
highlighted. For both sensor configurations, we apply the
same residual-based detection criterion introduced in Sec-
tion 3.2 using mr = 150 and αa = 6. The leakage alarm
timelines are shown in Fig. 8. The red dashed line marks
the leak start time at 26h and the colored intervals indicate
periods during which the residual-based detection triggers
an alarm.
Before the leak starts, both configurations trigger false
alarms due to the demand-driven pressure discontinu-
ities that momentarily increase the prediction error. The
PageRank-Centrality-based placement is noticeably less
sensitive to these discontinuities, its alarms are shorter,
and the detector returns more quickly to the no-alarm
state. In contrast, the arbitrary placement reacts more
strongly to the same discontinuities, resulting in longer
false-alarm periods. Once the leak begins, the PageRank-
Centrality-based placement raises an alarm immediately
110
120
130
Pressure head [m]
(a)
Leaky junction (21)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [h]
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
Pressure residual [m]
(b)
10
22
11
23
12
31
13
32
21
Leakage start time
Fig. 7. Leakage simulation in Net1: (a) pressure trajecto-
ries with the leaky junction highlighted, (b) pressure
differences relative to leak-free conditions.
No alarm
Alarm
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [h]
No alarm
Alarm
Alarm (arbitrary placement)
Alarm (PageRank placement)
Leak start
Fig. 8. Comparison leak alarms for PageRank-Centrality-
based and arbitrary sensor placements on Net1.
and maintains it for a longer interval than any of its
false alarms. The arbitrary placement responds only after
roughly 30 minutes and produces a shorter alarm, even
though its false-alarm periods are longer. This behaviour
reflects the improved reconstruction–prediction accuracy
with the PageRank-Centrality-based sensor placement.
5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper investigated how PageRank-Centrality-based
sensor placement influences the performance of a Cheb-
Net architecture for pressure reconstruction, one-step-
ahead prediction, and leakage detection in water distribu-
tion networks. Using the EPANET Net1 benchmark, we
demonstrated that selecting sensors based on PageRank
Centrality yields more informative measurement locations,
resulting in lower reconstruction and prediction errors
and significantly reduced false-alarm time compared to
an arbitrary sensor placement. These improvements were
observed both in normal operation and under a leakage
scenario. Additionally, the predictor consistently showed
larger residuals than the reconstructor, which could be
explained by the abrupt pressure discontinuities driven by
the demand pattern.
For future work, several challenges could be explored.
First, incorporating smoother and more realistic demand
patterns may help reduce the discontinuity-driven pre-
diction errors observed in the current setup. In practice,
such sharp pressure steps rarely occur except during pipe
bursts, normal demand variations produce much gentler
changes. Second, further improvements to the architecture
could focus on handling these sharp transients more effec-
tively. Third, a robust method for distinguishing demand-
driven pressure drops from leak-induced deviations re-
mains an important open question. Finally, applying the
PageRank-Centrality-based sensor placement to larger and
more complex networks would allow for the assessment of
scalability and generalization.
REFERENCES
AL-Washali, T., Sharma, S., AL-Nozaily, F., Haidera, M.,
and Kennedy, M. (2018).
Modelling the leakage rate
and reduction using minimum night flow analysis in an
intermittent supply system. Water, 11(1), 48.
Annaswamy, A.M., Johansson, K.H., and Pappas, G.
(2024). Control for societal-scale challenges: Road map
2030. IEEE Control Systems Magazine, 44(3), 30–32.
Bopardikar, S.D. (2021). A randomized approach to sensor
placement with observability assurance.
Automatica,
123, 109340.
Brin, S. and Page, L. (1998). The anatomy of a large-scale
hypertextual web search engine. Computer networks and
ISDN systems, 30(1-7), 107–117.
Garðarsson, G.Ö., Boem, F., and Toni, L. (2022). Graph-
based learning for leak detection and localisation in wa-
ter distribution networks. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 55(6),
661–666.
Geelen, C.V., Yntema, D.R., Molenaar, J., and Keesman,
K.J. (2021). Optimal sensor placement in hydraulic con-
duit networks: A state-space approach. Water, 13(21),
3105.
Hajgató, G., Gyires-Tóth, B., and Paál, G. (2021). Re-
constructing nodal pressures in water distribution sys-
tems with graph neural networks.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.13619.
Hu, Z., Chen, B., Chen, W., Tan, D., and Shen, D. (2021).
Review of model-based and data-driven approaches for
leak detection and location in water distribution sys-
tems. Water Supply, 21(7), 3282–3306.
Lee, S.S., Lee, H.H., and Lee, Y.J. (2022).
Prediction
of minimum night flow for enhancing leakage detection
capabilities in water distribution networks.
Applied
Sciences, 12(13), 6467.
Pérez-Pérez,
E.d.J.,
López-Estrada,
F.R.,
Valencia-
Palomo, G., Torres, L., Puig, V., and Mina-Antonio,
J.D. (2021). Leak diagnosis in pipelines using a com-
bined artificial neural network approach. Control Engi-
neering Practice, 107, 104677.
Qi, R., Cao, M., and Yntema, D.R. (2024). Recent devel-
opments of subsurface small-leak detection techniques in
water distribution networks: A review. IEEE Robotics
& Automation Magazine, 31(1), 108–118.
Romero-Ben, L., Cembrano, G., Puig, V., and Blesa, J.
(2022). Model-free sensor placement for water distribu-
tion networks using genetic algorithms and clustering.
IFAC-PapersOnLine, 55(33), 54–59.
Santos-Ruiz, I., López-Estrada, F.R., Puig, V., Valencia-
Palomo, G., and Hernández, H.R. (2022). Pressure sen-
sor placement for leak localization in water distribution
networks using information theory. Sensors, 22(2), 443.
Truong, H., Tello, A., Lazovik, A., and Degeler, V. (2024).
Graph neural networks for pressure estimation in water
distribution systems. Water Resources Research, 60(7),
e2023WR036741.
van Gemert, J., Breschi, V., Yntema, D.R., Keesman,
K.J., and Lazar, M. (2025a).
Exploiting structural
observability and graph colorability for optimal sensor
placement in water distribution networks.
In 2025
European Control Conference (ECC), 546–551.
van Gemert, J., Breschi, V., Yntema, D.R., Keesman, K.J.,
and Lazar, M. (2025b). Scalable sensor placement for
cyclic networks with observability guarantees: Appli-
cation to water distribution networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.09965. (accepted for the CDC 2025).
Xu, Q., Liu, R., Chen, Q., and Li, R. (2014). Review on
water leakage control in distribution networks and the
associated environmental benefits. Journal of Environ-
mental Sciences, 26(5), 955–961.
