 
© © 20xx IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission 
from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future 
media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or 
promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or 
redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component 
of this work in other works. 
 
The final version of record is available at IEEE Xplore: 
J. G. Zalameda, M. A. Witherow, A. M. Glandon, J. Aguilera and K. M. 
Iftekharuddin, "Attack Assessment and Augmented Identity 
Recognition for Human Skeleton Data," 2023 International Joint 
Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), Gold Coast, Australia, 2023, 
pp. 1-8, doi: 10.1109/IJCNN54540.2023.10191835. 
 
Attack Assessment and Augmented Identity 
Recognition for Human Skeleton Data 
 
Joseph G. Zalameda  
Dept. of ECE 
Old Dominion University 
Norfolk, VA, USA 
jzala001@odu.edu 
 
 
Megan A. Witherow  
Dept. of ECE 
Old Dominion University 
Norfolk, VA, USA 
mwith010@odu.edu 
 
 
Alexander M. Glandon  
Dept. of ECE 
Old Dominion University 
Norfolk, VA, USA 
aglan001@odu.edu 
 
 
Jose Aguilera 
Dept. of Computer Science 
Amherst College 
Hampshire County, MA, USA 
jaguilera23@amherst.edu 
 
Khan M. Iftekharuddin  
Dept. of ECE 
Old Dominion University 
Norfolk, VA, USA 
kiftekha@odu.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Machine learning models trained on small data 
sets for security applications are especially vulnerable to 
adversarial attacks. Person identification from LiDAR based 
skeleton data requires time consuming and expensive data 
acquisition for each subject identity. Recently, Assessment and 
Augmented Identity Recognition for Skeletons (AAIRS) has 
been used to train Hierarchical Co-occurrence Networks for 
Person Identification (HCN-ID) with small LiDAR based 
skeleton data sets. However, AAIRS does not evaluate 
robustness of HCN-ID to adversarial attacks or inoculate the 
model to defend against such attacks. Popular perturbation-
based approaches to generating adversarial attacks are 
constrained to targeted perturbations added to real training 
samples, which is not ideal for inoculating models with small 
training sets. Thus, we propose Attack-AAIRS, a novel addition 
to the AAIRS framework. Attack-AAIRS leverages a small real 
data set and a generative adversarial network (GAN) generated 
synthetic data set to assess and improve model robustness 
against unseen adversarial attacks. Rather than being 
constrained to perturbations of limited real training samples, 
the GAN learns the distribution of adversarial attack samples 
that exploit weaknesses in HCN-ID. Attack samples drawn from 
this distribution augment training for inoculation of the HCN-
ID to improve robustness. Ten-fold cross validation of Attack-
AAIRS yields noticeable increase in robustness to unseen 
attacks- including Fast Gradient Sign Method, Projected 
Gradient Descent, Additive Gaussian Noise, Momentum 
Iterative Fast Gradient Sign Method, and Basic Iterative 
Method. The HCN-ID Synthetic Data Quality Score for Attack-
AAIRS indicates that generated attack samples are of similar 
quality to the original benign synthetic samples generated by 
AAIRS. Furthermore, inoculated models show consistent final 
test accuracy with the original model trained on real data, 
demonstrating that our method improves robustness to 
adversarial attacks without reducing testing performance on 
real data.   
Keywords—Small Data Set, Model Robustness, Security, 
Human Identity Recognition, Skeleton Data, Motion Capture 
Data, Generative Adversarial Networks, Synthetic Data 
Generation  
I. INTRODUCTION 
Efficient 3D skeleton encoding of human form and pose 
have proven effective for human behavioral analysis and 
identification with applications in security and surveillance 
[1-5]. In particular, far field LiDAR based skeleton extraction 
systems [1] enable long range skeleton acquisition in low 
light environments as opposed to visual based skeleton 
extraction [6]. However, LiDAR based skeleton data sets are 
expensive and time-consuming to collect, and thus, suffer 
from a limited number of samples, noise in joint movements 
between video frames, error in joint location estimation (e.g., 
occluded joint locations), and null frames. Overcoming these 
challenges is paramount to ensure stringent reliability and 
robustness of security systems. 
Deep learning methods such as Convolutional Neural 
Networks (CNNs) have shown robust performance on 
skeleton data for security-related tasks, including action 
recognition [2,5,7], gender classification [4,8,9], and person 
identification [1,3,9]. Hierarchical Co-occurrence Networks 
(HCN) [5], which leverage the local- and global-level feature 
aggregation properties of CNN, have proven effective for 
action recognition [5] and person identification tasks (HCN-
ID) [3]. However, like other deep learning approaches, HCN 
is prone to overfit to small training data and requires large 
data sets to accurately approximate the true decision 
boundary [3]. In [3], Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) 
[10] based data augmentation, e.g., Deep Convolution GAN 
 
 
(DC-GAN) [11] and Auxiliary Classifier GAN (AC-GAN) 
[12], are shown to improve HCN-ID performance on 
relatively small person identification data sets based on 
LiDAR skeleton extraction.  
Recently, adversarial attack methods threaten models 
deployed in security applications and vulnerable systems 
where model reliability and robustness must be well 
understood. Adversarial attacks may take place at training 
time, e.g., ‘poisoning’ the training set, or test time [13]. We 
focus on test time, where attacks seek to exploit weaknesses 
in the model’s learned decision boundaries [14]. Such attacks 
may be especially potent in the case of small data sets, with 
which models may suffer poorly regularized decision 
boundaries due to insufficient training data. 
A popular mode of test time attack is the generation of 
structured noise, i.e., a perturbation, that is added to the input 
to cause misclassification. One of the earliest and most 
popular examples of this approach is the Fast Gradient Sign 
Method (FGSM) [14], which uses the model’s gradients to 
generate an attack perturbation to shift  samples across the 
decision boundary and cause misclassifications. Other 
examples of perturbation-based attack methods include 
Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) [15], Gaussian Noise 
(GN) [16], Momentum Iterative Fast Gradient Sign Method 
(MI-FGSM) [17], and Basic Iterative Method (BIM) [18]. A 
popular defense framework is to train models on perturbed 
input samples to inoculate the model against known attacks 
[13]. Therefore, to generate more varied and complex 
perturbations, GAN-based approaches, such as Unrestricted 
Black-box Adversarial Attack Using GAN [19] and Attack 
Inspired GAN (AI-GAN) [20], have become increasingly 
popular. However, perturbation-generating methods [14-19] 
are constrained by the available input samples to which the 
attack noise will be added. Thus, such methods suffer from 
the challenges associated with learning from small data, e.g., 
overfitting. Furthermore, generation of new attack methods is 
an active research area and thus, it may not be possible to 
inoculate models against all possible attacks. Recently,  
Adversarial Transformation GAN (AT-GAN) [21] has been 
proposed to learn a distribution of adversarial examples close 
to the real data distribution, yielding synthetic adversarial 
examples that are not constrained to perturbations of real 
input examples. The real data distribution is learned using an 
AC-GAN [12] and then transferred to attack a target model 
[21].  
Synthetic adversarial data generation and inoculation has 
not been studied for person identification in small LiDAR 
extracted skeleton data sets. Existing attack frameworks for 
skeleton data, such as the Constrained Iterative Attack for 
Skeleton Actions (CIASA) [22], rely on constrained 
adversarial examples generated by perturbing real skeleton 
data and fail to address challenges associated with small data 
sets. Given that adversarial attacks exploit weaknesses in a 
model’s decision boundaries which are further exacerbated in 
models trained on small data sets [14], we anticipate that AC-
GAN based data augmentation as in [3] will enrich the 
decision boundaries by better capturing the underlying real 
data distribution. Furthermore, we hypothesize that the 
distribution of adversarial samples learned by an AT-GAN 
trained to exploit a model’s weaknesses may be used to 
fortify decision boundaries against a wide variety of attacks.  
Inspired by the success of AC-GAN for synthetic skeleton 
data augmentation [3], we propose an AT-GAN based attack 
generation and inoculation framework to yield a more robust 
HCN-ID based person identification model. We evaluate the 
performance of inoculated and un-inoculated models on 
multiple unseen attack methods, including FGSM, PGD, GN, 
MI-FGSM, and BIM. Building on the existing Assessment of 
Augmented Identity Recognition for Skeletons (AAIRS) 
framework from [3], we name our proposed method Attack 
Assessment of Augmented Identity Recognition for 
Skeletons (Attack-AAIRS). The contributions of Attack-
AAIRS are as follows: 
• 
The vulnerability of a target classifier (HCN-ID) 
trained on a small LiDAR extracted skeleton data set 
is assessed considering multiple attack methods 
(FGSM, PGD, GN, MI-FGSM, and BIM). 
• 
An AT-GAN is trained to produce synthetic 
adversarial examples that are not constrained to the 
small real LiDAR extracted skeleton data set. The 
quality of these synthetic adversarial examples is 
assessed in comparison to synthetic samples 
generated from the data distribution learned from 
real data. 
• 
The synthetic adversarial examples are used to 
inoculate the target classifier. The inoculated model 
is evaluated considering multiple unseen attack 
methods (FGSM, PGD, GN, MI-FGSM, and BIM).  
• 
Inoculated 
and 
un-inoculated 
classifiers 
are 
evaluated on real test data to study the effect of 
inoculation on model classification performance. 
Attack-AAIRS provides a reliable framework for 
vulnerability assessment and attack inoculation of skeleton 
person identification models given a small skeleton data set 
extracted from LiDAR videos.  
II. BACKGROUND 
A. Skeleton Data 
Consider a series of skeleton data frames as a skeleton 
video. Each frame is represented by a 3-dimensional point 
cloud. Each point is a spatial location of a joint at a given 
moment in time. Each skeleton video sample takes the form 
of a tensor X, which has a 4-dimensional structure (Eq. 1) 
with N samples, C=3 axes, T frames, and J joints. Each 
sample has a label denoting the associated person ID. The 
shape of the label tensor Y is shown in Eq. 2. 
𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒(𝑿) = [𝑁, 𝐶, 𝑇, 𝐽]
(1) 
 
𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒(𝒀) = [𝑁, 1]
(2) 
 
 
B. HCN-ID 
HCN-ID [3] is an HCN [5] network trained to identify 
people in skeleton videos based on their gait. HCN [5] is a 
CNN-based deep network for classification of skeleton 
videos based on spatial movement of individual joints 
through time. HCN 𝐻(𝑥1, 𝑥2, … , 𝑥𝑁|𝜃𝐻) takes as input the 
model weights 𝜃𝐻 and a skeleton video sample with multiple 
frames 𝑥1, 𝑥2, … , 𝑥𝑁∈𝑋∈ℝ𝐶,𝑇,𝐽. A HCN models joint co-
occurrence by performing global feature aggregation across 
the skeleton joints as channels during convolution [5]. To 
explicitly model temporal motion of the skeleton, two parallel 
CNN branches process (1) the current joint locations and (2) 
the difference between the joint locations in the current frame 
and the previous frame, respectively [5]. Eq. 3 describes how 
the temporal difference in the latter branch is computed [5]:  
𝑥̇ = 𝑥(: ,1: 𝑇, : ) −𝑥(: ,0: 𝑇−1, : )
(3) 
This results in a derivative computation that is filtered 
along with the original branch. The outputs of these two 
branches are concatenated and then further processed by a set 
of CNN and feedforward classification layers. 
C. AAIRS Framework 
The AAIRS framework [3] has been applied to assess 
viability of synthetic data augmentation on a small skeleton 
dataset extracted from multiple LiDAR videos exhibiting 
noise in joint movement between video frames, error in joint 
location estimation, and null frames. The framework [3] 
leverages AC-GAN [12] to augment training of HCN-ID. 
Training augmentation involves learning the underlying real 
data distribution using AC-GAN [12]. Then, the trained 
generator from AC-GAN samples this distribution to produce 
synthetic samples that are mixed in with the real samples to 
augment the model training. As reported in [3], AAIRS-based 
data augmentation achieves an increase in testing accuracy of 
the HCN-ID of 5.68% with a mix of 50% real and 50% 
synthetic data across 10 cross validation folds.  
Quality of the produced synthetic skeletons is quantified 
in [3] using an adaptation of inception score called the HCN-
ID score. The HCN-ID score range is [1,9], with 1 being the 
lowest and 9 being the highest [3]. The synthetic skeletons 
produced by the AAIRS framework exhibit an average score 
of 3.933 ± 0.867. The real data yields a mean HCN-ID score 
of 8.352 ± 0.105.  
To our knowledge, neither HCN-ID or the AAIRS 
framework have been assessed for adversarial attack 
vulnerability.  
D. Attack Frameworks 
FGSM [14] is popular test time attack method that alters 
inputs with a small, targeted perturbation. A successful attack 
will cause the targeted classifier to misclassify the perturbed 
input. The perturbation is computed using the sign of the 
gradients of the target classifier with respect to the input 
image. The adversarial attack samples 𝑋𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 are generated 
by the FGSM in [14] by adding perturbation 𝑃 to unaltered 
input data 𝑋 with an attack magnitude value 𝜀:  
 
𝑋𝐹𝐺𝑆𝑀= 𝑋+ 𝜀∗𝑃
(4) 
The attack methods PGD [15], BIM [18], and MI-FGSM 
[17] utilize a variant of the iterative based FGSM based attack 
framework shown in Eq. 5 where itr refers to the number of 
iterations. The Additive Gaussian Noise based attack (GN) 
[16] adds Gaussian noise of a fixed magnitude to the real 
samples. 
𝑥𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘
𝑖𝑡𝑟+1 = 𝑥𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘
𝑖𝑡𝑟
+ 𝜀∗𝑃
(5) 
E. AT-GAN 
The Adversarial Transformation GAN (AT-GAN) from 
[21] is a transfer learning framework designed to shift a 
pretrained generator from producing reinforcing synthetic 
samples to producing adversarial synthetic examples. This is 
done by introducing a domain shift to the pretrained generator 
that is designed to minimize the distance between synthetic 
samples produced by the original generator and adversarial 
synthetic samples produced by the attack generator along 
with a minimization in target classifier accuracy. This results 
in a generator that can produce unconstrained adversarial 
examples [21].  
The AT-GAN framework consists of three individual 
networks: an original generator (𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙), an 
attack generator (𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘), and a target classifier. 
The target classifier serves as a representation of the model 
to be attacked, the attack generator is the network to be 
trained by the AT-GAN to produce the synthetic adversarial 
examples, and the original generator is used as a reference of 
benign samples during training. The parameters for 
𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 and 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 are initialized 
using a single source generator pretrained on the original real 
 
Fig. 1. AT-GAN Training Pipeline from [21] 
 
 
dataset. The target classifier is pretrained to yield high 
classification accuracy for both the original real dataset and 
the synthetic data produced by the source generator.  
Once pretraining is completed, the source generator 
parameter values are used to initialize the original and attack 
generators of the AT-GAN. Feedback from the pretrained 
target classifier is used during the training of the AT-GAN in 
order to exploit that classifier’s weaknesses. The trainable 
parameters of the original generator and target classifier are 
frozen for the duration of the AT-GAN training. The 
following objective function is used to train AT-GAN [21]: 
𝐴𝑇𝐺𝐴𝑁 𝑂𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒= Min(𝛼∗𝐴𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡+ 𝛽∗𝐷𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘) (6) 
The goal of 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟Attack is to produce the synthetic 
adversarial examples 𝑋Adversarial that are designed to attack 
the target classifier. The objective function of the AT-GAN 
shown in Eq. 6 minimizes the target classifier accuracy on 
these adversarial samples 𝐴𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 and the distance 𝐷𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 
between 
the 
outputs 
of 
𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙
 and 
𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 to ensure the generated adversarial samples 
are close to the original data distribution. The values of 𝛼 and 
𝛽 are hyperparameters designed to weight each component of 
the objective function. 
III. METHODS 
A. Skeleton Data Set 
We use a skeleton data set extracted from LiDAR videos 
of 9 people walking at various ranges [1]. A 3-frame skeleton 
gait representation of the connected joints along with spatial 
dimension labels is shown in Fig 2. Each skeleton has J=13 
joints [1]. Following [3], we sample the videos into T=3 
frame segments. The resulting class distribution is shown in 
Fig 3.  
Additionally, each subject is centered at the origin and 
rotated to always face the front of the scene. All joint 
locations are normalized between [-1,1]. 
B. Attack-AAIRS Framework 
The proposed Attack-AAIRS framework builds on the 
existing AAIRS framework [3] to (1) assess attack 
vulnerability of the HCN-ID network to multiple attack 
frameworks, (2) learn the distribution of adversarial attack 
samples for HCN-ID using the AT-GAN approach, generate 
and assess the quality of  adversarial attack samples drawn 
from this distribution, (3) inoculate HCN-ID for test time 
attacks by training the network with generated adversarial 
examples and assess the robustness of the inoculated HCN-
ID to multiple unseen attack methods (FGSM, PGD, GN, MI-
FGSM, and BIM), (4) study the effect of inoculation on 
HCN-ID model accuracy.  
 
Fig. 2. Single Skeleton Gait Representation 3 Frame Sample 
 
Fig. 3. Person ID Data Set Distribution 
109
221
379
233
227
209
218
338
197
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Number of Samples
Subject Class
Dataset Class Distribution
 
Fig. 4. Attack-AAIRS Attack Test Data Pipeline 
Fig. 5. Attack-AAIRS Augmentation Pipeline 
 
 
The four goals above are implemented as follows. For (1), 
we create an attack test set 𝑋𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 to assess vulnerability to 
a given attack method (Fig 4). We apply the attack method 
with perturbation magnitude value 𝜀 to real test samples 
𝑋𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡 with test set labels 𝑌𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡. We consider an untargeted 
attack, where attack set labels 𝑌𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 are the same as real test 
set labels 𝑌𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡.  
We perform in depth analysis on the FGSM [14] because 
it is one of the most common attack methods and the basis for 
many others (e.g., PGD, MI-FGSM, and BIM). We also 
evaluate three iterative methods (PGD, MI-FGSM, and BIM) 
as well as simple additive gaussian noise (GN). 
The quality of the resulting 𝑋𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 samples are evaluated 
as the attack success rate, measured as the percentage of 
attack samples misclassified by the target classifier. For (2), 
we use the AT-GAN framework (Fig 1) to yield a 
𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 capable of producing unconstrained 
synthetic adversarial examples 𝑋𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙 that exploit the 
vulnerabilities of HCN-ID. We consider the pretrained 
generator from the AAIRS framework as 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙. 
𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 is initialized with the weights of 
𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙. Training minimizes Eq. 6 to produce 
adversarial examples 𝑋𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙 from the input adversarial 
noise 𝑍𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙 and adversarial labels 𝐿𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙. To 
quantitatively assess the quality of the generated samples, we 
use the HCN-ID Score [3], a quality score for synthetic 
skeleton samples based on inception score [23]. For (3), we 
perform inoculation (Fig 5) by augmenting the training of 
HCN-ID with samples from 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘. The 
robustness of HCN-ID to each unseen attack method (FGSM, 
PGD, GN, MI-FGSM, or BIM) before and after inoculation 
is performed using (𝑋𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘, 𝑌𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘). Accuracy on real test 
samples (𝑋𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡, 𝑌𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡) is also assessed for (4).  
C. Experiments 
The proposed Attack-AAIRS framework requires a 
pretrained target classifier and pretrained AC-GAN generator 
𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙. For the target classifier, we consider two 
variants of the HCN-ID from the AAIRS framework: (a) 
HCN-ID Model 1 trained on only real skeleton data and (b) 
HCN-ID Model 2 trained on a N=50% mix of real data and 
synthetic data from the AAIRS generator. These HCN-ID 
variants represent the baseline model and the best model, 
respectively, reported in [3]. The process for pretraining these 
two models is shown in Fig 6. Note that the left most branch 
of Fig 6 follows the same structure as the AAIRS framework 
[3]. For both variants, we train following [3] using a batch 
size of 64 for 100 epochs. The gradients are updated using the 
Adam optimizer [24] with a learning rate of 0.001. For 
𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙, we consider the AAIRS generator trained 
following [3] using a batch size of 32 for 600 epochs. The 
𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 network structure is extended with an 
additional convolutional layer in addition to the network in  
[3]. We train 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 for 100 epochs with a batch 
size of 900 evenly distributed across all 9 classes. The 
𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 parameters are updated using Stochastic 
Gradient Descent (SGD) with a learning rate of 0.0002. The 
ideal values for 𝛼 and 𝛽 are empirically determined as 1 and 
2, respectively. We assess the proposed Attack-AAIRS 
framework using multiple unseen attack methods (FGSM, 
PGD, GN, MI-FGSM, or BIM). Using FGSM as an exemplar 
(𝑋𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘= 𝑋𝐹𝐺𝑆𝑀), we provide further in-depth assessment 
of Attack-AAIRS robustness. A good attack method will be 
effective (in terms of attack success rate) and produce attack 
samples that appear benign. Thus, we assess and compare the 
quality of Attack-AAIRS generated samples to benign 
samples generated by AAIRS. A good defense method is 
expected to improve robustness to attacks without degrading 
performance on real samples. Therefore, we also compare the 
performance of inoculated and un-inoculated models on real 
data. 
We consider several experiments as follows:  
1. We benchmark the vulnerability of the two variants of the 
HCN-ID for multiple attack frameworks. For FGSM, we 
study attack success rate across different perturbation 
magnitudes 𝜀. Multiple attack frameworks are used in Fig 
4 to generate 𝑋𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘. We repeat this procedure for the 
inoculated models to assess the effect of augmented 
training with samples from 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘. We 
quantify model robustness as 1 −𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 𝑆𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒.  
 
 
Fig. 6. HCN-ID Target Classifier Pretraining  
 
 
 
2. The HCN-ID score [3] is used to assess the quality of 
synthetic samples from 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 compared to 
𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 and the real data.  
 
3. Accuracy of the inoculated and un-inoculated versions of 
HCN-ID Model 1 and HCN-ID Model 2 are evaluated on 
the real test data.  
We repeat all experiments over 10 cross validation folds 
where each fold represents 10% of the data set and all classes 
are represented. Each fold is held out for testing once, 
yielding ten different 90%/10% train/test splits. To prevent 
cross contamination between the train and test sets, models 
are randomly initialized between each fold.  
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Attack-AAIRS Results 
We benchmark HCN-ID Model 1 and HCN-ID Model 2 
against 𝑋𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘to measure inherent robustness prior to 
inoculation. Fig 7 plots the mean FGSM attack success rate 
over 10 folds for different attack magnitudes 𝜀 ranging from 
0 to 0.19. The initial attack magnitude 𝜀=0 corresponds to the 
baseline test performance of the model without any 
perturbation to the test set. HCN-ID Model 2 exhibits better 
baseline robustness to the attack compared to HCN-ID Model 
1.   
We attribute this increased robustness to the AC-GAN based 
synthetic data training augmentation in the AAIRS 
framework [3]. Due to the limited number of samples in the 
LiDAR skeleton data set, it is expected that HCN-ID Model 
1 does not have access to the full real data distribution during 
training, yielding a less accurate and more vulnerable 
decision boundary.  
The synthetic samples generated by the AC-GAN are 
expected to fill in gaps in the real data training distribution, 
resulting in improved test performance and robustness to 
adversarial attacks for HCN-ID Model 2. The attack 
effectiveness converges at 𝜀= ~0.1  to be roughly equal for 
both models. This indicates room for improvement against 
more aggressive attacks for both HCN-ID Model 1 and 2.  
Fig 8 and Fig 9 compare FGSM based 𝑋𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 
effectiveness on HCN-ID Model 1 and HCN-ID Model 2, 
respectively, before and after inoculation with the adversarial 
samples from 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘. A noticeable improvement 
in robustness can be seen for the inoculated models over all 𝜀 
values. The most notable improvement for both inoculated 
models is shown when 𝜀≤0.1. Given that HCN-ID Model 2 
is more resilient to 𝑋𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘  prior to inoculation (Fig 7), the 
magnitude of improvement is not as substantial for HCN-ID 
Model 2 (Fig 9) compared to HCN-ID Model 1 (Fig 8).   
Table I. Attack-AAIRS Average Model Robustness Improvement 
Attack Method 
Robustness 
Improvement on 
HCN-ID Model 1 
Robustness 
Improvement on 
HCN-ID Model 2 
FGSM 
0.071 
0.054 
 
Fig. 7. Attack-AAIRS Effectiveness on Pretrained HCN-ID 
Models using FGSM 
 
Fig. 8. Attack-AAIRS Augmentation Pipeline Effectiveness on 
HCN-ID Model 1 using FGSM 
 
Fig. 9. Attack-AAIRS Augmentation Pipeline Effectiveness on 
HCN-ID Model 2 using FGSM 
 
 
PGD 
0.083 
0.061 
GN 
0.240 
0.010 
MI-FGSM 
0.067 
0.050 
BIM 
0.135 
0.110 
 
Table 1 shows the mean improvement in model 
robustness (1 −𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 𝑆𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒) to 𝑋𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 for both 
HCN-ID Model 1 and HCN-ID Model 2 for multiple attack 
frameworks. The associated parameters for each framework 
are as follows: PGD [15] with 𝑒𝑝𝑠=
8
255 , 𝑎𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎=
2
255 , 𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝𝑠= 10; GN with 𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑢𝑑𝑒= 1, 𝑠𝑡𝑑𝑒𝑣= 0.1 ; 
MI-FGSM 
with 
𝑒𝑝𝑠=
8
255 , 𝑎𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎=
2
255 , 𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝𝑠=
10, 𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑦= 1.0; and BIM [18] with 𝑒𝑝𝑠=
8
255 , 𝑎𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎=
2
255 , 𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝𝑠= 10. This shows that the model inoculation with 
Attack-AAIRS provides better robustness for both target 
classifiers across multiple attack frameworks. 
B. Quality Assessment of Adversarial Samples 
An important property of effective attack methods is that 
adversarial attack samples appear similar to benign real 
samples. Thus, we assess the quality of samples produced by 
Attack-AAIRS 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 using the HCN-ID Score 
[3] and compare with the scores from 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 and 
the real data. These results are reported in Table 2. The HCN-
ID Score is computed using HCN-ID Model 1, which is 
trained only on real skeleton data. HCN-ID Score ranges from 
[1,9] with a score of 1 being the worst and a score of 9 being 
the best.  
Note that the improvements to the network structure of 
𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 yield an increase in the mean HCN-ID 
Score of 0.764 over the reported HCN-ID Score from [3]. 
Furthermore, although the focus of the Attack-AAIRS is 
adversarial training, the final HCN-ID Score produced by the 
Attack-AAIRS generated data only degrades the HCN-ID 
score by 0.244. This indicates that the adversarial 
transformation learned by the Attack-AAIRS framework 
maintains skeleton quality close to the original synthetic 
samples.  
Table II: Mean HCN-ID Score Assessment 
Data Set 
Mean HCN-ID Score 
Real Data (Baseline) 
8.381 ± 0.067 
Synthetic Data from AAIRS [3] 
3.933 ± 0.867 
Synthetic Data from Attack-AAIRS 
original generator  
4.348 ± 0.880 
Synthetic Data from Attack-AAIRS 
adversarial generator 
4.104 ± 0.799 
C. Evaluation on Real Test Data 
A good defense framework will improve a model’s 
robustness to attacks and also maintain model performance 
on the real data. The mean test accuracy over 10 cross 
validation folds for the real test data (𝑋𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡, 𝑌𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡) is reported 
in Table 3. The worst performing model is HCN-ID Model 1 
trained with only real data. The inoculated HCN-ID Model 2 
is the best performing model, achieving a test accuracy of 
72.74% which is a slight accuracy increase over HCN-ID 
Model 1. This is achieved by training with both the AAIRS 
and Attack-AAIRS frameworks. The inclusion of the Attack-
AAIRS framework not only improves model robustness to 
𝑋𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 but also maintains test accuracy on the real data. 
Attack-AAIRS targets weaknesses in the HCN-ID decision 
boundaries and patches these weaknesses through the 
inoculation process. This yields a more robust decision 
boundary that is less vulnerable and better captures the real 
underlying data distribution.  
Table III. Mean Testing Accuracy Across all 10 Folds 
Network 
Mean Test Accuracy 
Base HCN-ID  
(HCN-ID Model 1) 
66.54% ± 3.29% 
HCN-ID Trained with 
Attack-AAIRS 
(HCN-ID Model 1 Trained with 
𝑋𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙) 
71.47% ± 3.58% 
HCN-ID Trained with 
AAIRS (HCN-ID Model 2) 
72.22% ± 3.29% 
HCN-ID Trained with 
AAIRS+Attack-AAIRS 
(HCN-ID Model 2 Trained with 
𝑋𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙) 
72.74% ± 3.70% 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The proposed Attack-AAIRS provides an adversarial 
attack training and testing framework for use with small, gait 
based human identity classification skeleton data sets 
extracted from LiDAR videos. This method leverages the 
GAN-based synthetic data generation to augment adversarial 
training of the target classifier, which allows for meaningful 
classifier robustness improvements appropriate for small data 
sets. Furthermore, these improvements are achieved while 
maintaining synthetic skeleton data quality. Combining the 
AAIRS and Attack-AAIRS frameworks for training 
improves model accuracy and robustness to adversarial 
attacks, both of which are critical for security applications. 
In the future, the Attack-AAIRS framework will be used 
to benchmark model robustness to more complex adversarial 
attacks [13] such as GAN-based attacks [21, 22]. The 
modular design of Attack-AAIRS is designed to make 
interchanging attack frameworks simple and allow for 
relatively quick adaptation and evaluation of different attack 
types.  Among these, we plan to study the robustness of 
models trained with Attack-AAIRS against AT-GAN 
generated adversarial test sets learned using independent sets 
of LiDAR extracted skeleton data. We also plan to study the 
feasibility of using improved AC-GAN based architectures 
like the Fast-Converging Conditional Generative Adversarial 
Network [25] along with this Attack-AAIRS framework. 
Additionally, we plan to comprehensively study the 
properties of decision boundaries in small data problems and 
the effect of GAN-based methods on improving the quality 
of such boundaries along with comparing with other existing 
state of the art adversarial defense methods [26]. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to acknowledge partial support of 
this work by US Army NVESD, CERDEC through Grant No. 
100659, DoD Center of Excellence in AI and Machine 
Learning (CoE-AIML) under Contract Number W911NF-20-
2-0277 with the U.S. Army Research Laboratory, and by the 
National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1828593, 
Grant No. 1950704, and Grant No. 1753793. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  
A. Glandon et al., "3d skeleton estimation and human identity 
recognition using lidar full motion video," in International Joint 
Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), Budapest, 2019.  
[2]  
Y. Du, Y. Fu and L. Wang, "Skeleton based action recognition 
with convolutional neural network," in 2015 3rd IAPR Asian 
Conference on Pattern Recognition (ACPR), 2015.  
[3]  
J. G. Zalameda, B. Kruse, A. M. Glandon, M. A. Witherow, S. 
Shetty and K. M. Iftekharuddin, "Generalized Adversarial and 
Hierarchical Co-occurrence Network based Synthetic Skeleton 
Generation 
and 
Human 
Identity 
Recognition," 
2022 
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), 
Padua, 
Italy, 
2022, 
pp. 
1-8, 
doi: 
10.1109/IJCNN55064.2022.9892887. 
[4]  
M. Navarro, A. Glandon, N. K. Dhar and K. M. Iftekharuddin, 
"Gender classification of full-body biological motion of 
aperiodic actions using machine learning," in Optics and 
Photonics for Information Processing XIV, 2020.  
[5]  
C. Li, Q. Zhong, D. Xie, S. Pu, "Co-occurrence Feature Learning 
from Skeleton Data for Action Recognition and Detection with 
Hierarchical Aggregation," ArXiv, vol. abs/1804.06055, 2018.  
[6]  
Z. Cao, G. Hidalgo, T. Simon, S.-E. Wei and Y. Sheikh, 
"OpenPose: Realtime Multi-Person 2D Pose Estimation using 
Part Affinity Fields," CoRR, vol. abs/1812.08008, 2018.  
[7]  
J. Qiu, X. Yan, W. Wang, W. Wei and K. Fang, "Skeleton-Based 
Abnormal Behavior Detection Using Secure Partitioned 
Convolutional Neural Network Model," IEEE Journal of 
Biomedical and Health Informatics, vol. 26, pp. 5829-5840, 
2022.  
[8]  
J. Flora, D. Lochtefeld, D. Bruening and K. Iftekharuddin, 
"Improved Gender Classification Using Nonpathological Gait 
Kinematics in Full-Motion Video," IEEE Transactions on 
Human-Machine Systems, vol. 45, pp. 1-11, June 2015.  
[9]  
S. Choi, J. Kim, W. Kim and C. Kim, "Skeleton-Based Gait 
Recognition via Robust Frame-Level Matching," IEEE 
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 14, 
pp. 2577-2592, 2019.  
[10]  
I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-
Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville and Y. Bengio, "Generative 
adversarial networks," Communications of the ACM, vol. 63, p. 
139–144, 2020.  
[11]  
A. Radford, L. Metz and S. Chintala, "Unsupervised 
representation learning with deep convolutional generative 
adversarial networks," arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015.  
[12]  
A. Odena, C. Olah, J. Shlens, "Conditional image synthesis with 
auxiliary classifier gans," in International conference on 
machine learning, Stockholm, 2017.  
[13]  
A. Chakraborty, M. Alam, V. Dey, A. Chattopadhyay and D. 
Mukhopadhyay, "Adversarial attacks and defences: A survey," 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00069, 2018.  
[14]  
I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens and C. Szegedy, "Explaining and 
harnessing 
adversarial 
examples," 
arXiv 
preprint 
arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.  
[15]  
A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras and A. Vladu, 
"Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks," 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083, 2017.  
[16]  
L. J. K. Samuel F. Dodge, "Understanding How Image Quality 
Affects Deep Neural Networks," in 2016 eighth international 
conference on quality of multimedia experience (QoMEX), 
Lisbon, Portugal, 2016.  
[17]  
Y. Dong, F. Liao, T. Pang, H. Su, J. Zhu, X. Hu and J. Li, 
"Boosting adversarial attacks with momentum," in Proceedings 
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern 
recognition, 2018.  
[18]  
A. Kurakin, I. J. Goodfellow and S. Bengio, "Adversarial 
examples in the physical world," in Artificial intelligence safety 
and security, Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2018, p. 99–112. 
[19]  
D. Na, S. Ji and J. Kim, "Unrestricted Black-box Adversarial 
Attack Using GAN with Limited Queries," arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2208.11613, 2022.  
[20]  
T. Bai, J. Zhao, J. Zhu, S. Han, J. Chen, B. Li and A. Kot, "Ai-
gan: Attack-inspired generation of adversarial examples," in 
2021 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing 
(ICIP), 2021.  
[21]  
X. Wang, K. He and J. E. Hopcroft, "AT-GAN: A Generative 
Attack Model for Adversarial Transferring on Generative 
Adversarial Nets," CoRR, vol. abs/1904.07793, 2019.  
[22]  
J. Liu, N. Akhtar and A. Mian, "Adversarial attack on skeleton-
based human action recognition," IEEE Transactions on Neural 
Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 33, p. 1609–1622, 2020.  
[23]  
T. Salimans, I. J. Goodfellow, W. Zaremba, V. Cheung, A. 
Radford and X. Chen, "Improved Techniques for Training 
GANs," CoRR, vol. abs/1606.03498, 2016.  
[24]  
D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, "Adam: A method for stochastic 
optimization," arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.  
[25] 
C. Li, Z. Wang and H. Qi, "Fast-Converging Conditional 
Generative Adversarial Networks for Image Synthesis," in 2018 
25th IEEE International Conference on Image Processing 
(ICIP), 2018. 
[26] 
Z. Qian, K. Huang, Q.-F. Wang and X.-Y. Zhang, A Survey of 
Robust 
Adversarial 
Training 
in 
Pattern 
Recognition: 
Fundamental, Theory, and Methodologies, 2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
