TAAC: A gate into Trustable Audio Affective Computing
Xintao Hu
Hefei University of Technology
Hefei, China
Feng-Qi Cui
Hefei University of Technology
Hefei, China
Abstract—With the emergence of AI techniques for depression
diagnosis, the conflict between high demand and limited supply
for depression screening has been significantly alleviated. Among
various modal data, audio-based depression diagnosis has received
increasing attention from both academia and industry since audio
is the most common carrier of emotion transmission. Unfortu-
nately, audio data also contains User-sensitive Identity Information
(ID), which is extremely vulnerable and may be maliciously used
during the smart diagnosis process. Among previous methods,
the clarification between depression features and sensitive features
has always serve as a barrier. It is also critical to the problem
for introducing a safe encryption methodology that only encrypts
the sensitive features and a powerful classifier that can correctly
diagnose the depression. To track these challenges, by leveraging
adversarial loss-based Subspace Decomposition, we propose a
first practical framework TAAC presented for Trustable Audio
Affective Computing, to perform automated depression detection
through audio within a trustable environment. The key enablers
of TAAC are Differentiating Features Subspace Decompositor
(DFSD), Flexible Noise Encryptor (FNE) and Staged Training
Paradigm, used for decomposition, ID encryption and performance
enhancement, respectively. Specifically, to separate different types
of features for protecting user privacy, by employing subspace-
based distenglement loss to dual-end Auto Encoder, we propose
DFSD to maximally decompose the features between id-related
and depression-related. Then, by employing progressive noise ad-
dition, we propose a Deterministic Diffusion (Encryption) process
and introduce FNE, for encrypting the id-related data with ad-
justable encryption strength. Then, by goal-oriented mulfunctional
segment-based collaborative training, a noval staged training
paradigm that enables different modules to specialize in their
respective predefined functions is designed. Extensive experiments
with existing encryption methods demonstrate our framework’s
preeminent performance in depression detection, ID reservation
and audio reconstruction. Meanwhile, the experiments across
various setting demonstrates our model’s stability under different
encryption strengths. Thus proving our framework’s excellence in
Confidentiality, Accuracy, Traceability, and Adjustability.
Index Terms—Depression Diagnosis, Personal Information Protec-
tion, Security, Trustable Affective Computing
1. Introduction
1.1. Backgrounds and Motivations
Depression is a widespread mental health condition affect-
ing an estimated 5% of adults globally [1], [2]. Left untreated,
depression can escalate to more severe symptoms. Recently,
Raw Audio Data
Third 
Party
Depression
Result
Personal
Information
Previous
Depression
Ours
Mixed Features
Neural
Network
ID
Depression Feature
Depression Feature
ID Feature
ID Feature
Non-Related Feature
…
…
…
…
Indicators
Transfer
SAFE
UNSAFE
Figure 1
The kernel insight of our implementation
rapid and efficient audio-based AI solutions, such as automated
PHQ-9 screenings [3], have been integrated into clinical work-
flows, which has greatly helped mitigate the shortage of mental
health professionals.
Compared to visual-based depression detection meth-
ods, audio-driven approaches offer enhanced convenience and
stronger privacy preservation for users. However, Trustability
remains underexplored in depression detection systems across
both visual and acoustic modalities. Academic studies have long
emphasized that audio contains voiceprints embedding User-
sensitive Identity Information (hereafter refer as ID) [4]. Re-
cent advances in speaker verification, such as the SpeechBrain
framework achieving a 0.69% Equal Error Rate [5], demon-
strate the near-biometric precision of current ID extraction
technologies. More critically, during PHQ-9 assessments, users
are required to verbally respond to sensitive questions about
personal experiences and emotions, the leakage of such voice
recordings could enable large-scale ID breaches.
In real-world deployments, while patients provide raw au-
dio recordings containing embedded ID, they lack technical
mechanisms to audit or constrain downstream data usage [6],
[7]. Malicious actors could exploit these vulnerabilities through
multiple attack vectors, such as bulk-reselling speech samples
on black or reconstructing identity vectors from audio snippets
to facilitate voice phishing campaigns. A particularly concern-
ing scenario involves critical institutional processes, such as
mandatory depression screenings during corporate hiring. If
audio data collected during corporate mental health assessments
is compromised, employee voiceprints - directly linked to their
identities, professional roles, and organizational occupations,
could be illicitly acquired by third-party headhunters.
Early research efforts, in audio-based depression detection
have primarily focused on improving diagnostic accuracy, often
assuming raw audio data is explicitly accessible and trust-
arXiv:2603.25570v1  [cs.CR]  26 Mar 2026
worthy. Many studies leverage semantic content (e.g., spoken
words) extracted directly from audio signals to infer depression
severity [8], [9], [10], which, under trustworthy AI frameworks,
represent sensitive attributes requiring protection.
1.2. Challenges and Contributions
Three major chanllenges need to be formally addressed
before establishing a trustable audio depression detection en-
vironment (Hereafter, the data owner is referred to as Party A,
and the delegated processor conducting depression detection is
termed Party B):
•
Confidentiality: In a trustable environment, mecha-
nisms must be established to prevent Party B from
directly accessing ID embedded in the audio data. This
necessitates supplementing additional obfuscation meth-
ods to mask identity-related features. Crucially, Party
B must be technically restricted from correlating audio
samples with their speakers.
•
Accuracy: While obfuscating ID in audio data, we
must ensure that depression-related information can still
be extracted reliably and that the system accurately
detects whether a speaker has depression—without ever
learning the speaker’s identity.
•
Traceability: While ensuring Party B cannot access
identity information in the audio data, Party A must
retain the capability to reconstruct the original audio
and map depression detection results back to individual
speakers upon receiving processed data from Party B.
An additional requirement may be introduced that Party A
should be able to dynamically adjust the encryption strength
based on operational priorities, lowering privacy-preserving
intensity in scenarios prioritizing detection accuracy while in-
creasing it in contexts demanding heightened security. This
flexibility inherently allows data owners to make context-aware
tradeoffs between analytical fidelity and confidentiality, en-
suring compliance with both clinical and organizational con-
straints.
To address these challenges, this paper proposes a novel
privacy-preserving depression detection framework. As illus-
trated by 1, in the lagacy framework, Party B is capable of il-
legally misusing identity information. Whereas in the proposed
framework, Party B is UNABLE to extract the identity infor-
mation while Party A’s ability to reconstruct identity attributes
is preserved.
However, within this novel framework, the co-design of
encryption modules and feature extraction networks remains
a critical challenge, requiring these components to be carefully
architected to achieve two objectives: (1) preserving sufficient
information for accurate depression detection, and (2) guar-
anteeing the computational irreversibility of ID. To achieve
these objectives, we design three major components that inte-
grates Subspace Decomposition for feature disentanglement and
Noise-diffusion Encryption for identity obfuscation, which em-
ploys hierarchical progressive training with multiple losses to
isolate depression biomarkers from speaker-specific attributes.
Implementation details will be introduced in Sec. 4.
In brief, our contributions can be broadly summarized as
follows:
•
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work
to formalize and address the trustability challenge in
depression detection, with a particular focus on data
protection in practical deployment.
•
We propose a Differentiating Features Subspace De-
composition (DFSD) network that employs subspace-
based disentanglement loss on a dual-end autoencoder,
effectively separating depression-related features from
ID.
•
To support diverse application scenarios with varying
security levels, we develop a Deterministic Tensor Dif-
fusion (DTD) encryption strategy based on conditional
probability and progressive noise injection via a Markov
chain, achieving a flexible balance between detection
accuracy and information confidentiality while resisting
advanced decryption models.
•
We design a goal-oriented, multifunctional, segment-
based collaborative training paradigm that enables each
module to specialize in its predefined role, improving
both depression recognition accuracy and feature disen-
tanglement.
•
Extensive experiments confirm that the proposed frame-
work achieves complete ID obfuscation while maintain-
ing near-state-of-the-art accuracy in depression detec-
tion.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec. 2 and 3
discusses numerous related studies and preliminaries. Then, we
describe the TAAC system design in Sec. 4. Implementation,
evaluation, and the impacts of various factors on TAAC perfor-
mance are presented in Sec. 5. Finally, we conclude our work
in Sec. 6
2. Related Work
2.1. Depression Detection
Depression Detection aims to automatically identify depres-
sive symptoms and assess their severity levels by analyzing an
individual’s behavioral patterns, speech, physiological signals,
or neural activity. Its applications include telemedicine, mental
health screening, and personalized treatment [11], [12]. In
recent years, the integration of multimodal data (such as speech,
text, video, and physiological signals) with deep learning tech-
niques has emerged as a major focus of research in this field
[13], [14].
The Audio/Visual Emotion Challenge (commonly known
as AVEC) [15], [16] is an internationally renowned multimodal
emotion recognition competition1. Since 2013, it has repeat-
edly hosted the Depression Sub-Challenge, a dedicated task
for depression detection, significantly advancing algorithmic
development in this field. Its primary datasets include DAIC-
WOZ [17], D-Vlog [18], and MODMA [19], among others.
In depression detection tasks, many current models have
adopted Language Models (LMs) or transformer-based architec-
tures, integrating transformers into hybrid frameworks to lever-
age their contextual comprehension capabilities for enhanced
depression screening [13], [20], [21], [22]. Moreover, a grow-
ing number of models are adopting multimodal fusion tech-
niques, integrating data across diverse modalities (Audio, Text,
Video, Biological Signals) for depression detection, leveraging
comprehensive multi-aspect information to improve diagnostic
accuracy [14], [23].
1. AVEC benchmarks ran annually from 2013 to 2019; the first three years
(2013-2015) and the final year (2019) are specifically cited here.
In the domain of audio-based depression detection, prior
research has explored various methodologies, Including Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) [24] to model latent connections
within/between audio signals and hybrid frameworks or uti-
lizing MFCC-derived spectrogram features processed through
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [25]. Additionally,
some studies have proposed using the pretrained Wav2Vec
model for feature extraction, combined with lightweight fine-
tuning networks, achieving highly effective detectionn results
[26].
The table 1 lists some of representative methods with their
reported classification metrics (Precision, Recall, F-1 score and
Accuracy).
2.2. Audio Encryption
Chaos Maps-Based Encryption (CMBE) is a data protec-
tion technique rooted in the properties of nonlinear dynamical
systems, which has garnered significant attention in the field
of audio encryption in recent years. Primarily applied to au-
dio transmission and storage, this method leverages dynamic
response capabilities and resistance to statistical analysis. A
defining feature is that even slight variations in the encryption
key trigger drastic changes in output, while the generated
chaotic sequences mimic random noise, effectively obscuring
the statistical characteristics of the original audio signals [31].
In addition to chaotic encryption, several other encryp-
tion algorithms have been proposed. For example, the Cosine
Number Transform (CNT) leverages recursive finite-field trans-
formations and overlapping block selection rules to achieve
global diffusion [32]. Alternatively, Permutation-Substitution
Architecture-based methods employ bit-level scrambling op-
erations followed by dynamic substitution driven by pseudo-
random sequences [33].
Furthermore, homomorphic encryption (HE) is a crypto-
graphic technique frequently employed in cloud computing and
machine learning scenarios. It enables direct arithmetic opera-
tions (e.g., addition, multiplication) on encrypted data, ensuring
that decrypted results match those obtained from equivalent
computations performed on plaintext. Its defining property lies
in preserving the operational utility of data while remaining
encrypted [34].
3. Preliminaries And Observations
3.1. Subspace Decomposition
At first glance, deploying conventional encryption methods
to securely transmit audio data to Party B for depression detec-
tion via specialized models seems theoretically feasible. How-
ever, our analysis reveals a critical limitation: conventional en-
cryption methods prioritize data confidentiality by transforming
raw signals into randomized noise patterns. While this ensures
security, the inherent unpredictability and non-decryptability of
such encrypted data severely impede the model’s ability to iden-
tify depression-specific features from chaotic representations,
thereby undermining detection accuracy.
Homomorphic Encryption (HE) has also been explored
for this task. While HE enables encrypted audio processing
within depression detection models [34], empirical evidence
demonstrates that despite voice content being obfuscated, ID
extraction models can still reliably determine whether two en-
crypted audio clips originate from the same speaker, indicating
that the individual’s ID remains exposed.
Thus, it necessitates a novel encryption paradigm capable of
maximally disentangling ID from depression-related features,
selectively obfuscating identity-sensitive attributes while pre-
serving the integrity of depression-related features. To this end,
we implement Subspace Decomposition [35], [36]:
S = Undα + Udβ,
(1)
Here, Und ∈Rd×k and Ud ∈Rd×m are orthogonal matrices
(UT
ndUd = 0), they correspond to the orthonormal basis vectors
of the NON-depressive feature subspace and the depression-
specific feature subspace, respectively. α ∈Rk and β ∈Rm
are coefficient vectors.
Note that Und is defined as the NON-depressive feature
subspace rather than a dedicated ID subspace, due to poten-
tial overlaps between depression-related and identity-sensitive
attributes. Our method ensures that depression-specific features
are retained in Ud, while enforcing orthogonality constraints
between Ud and the non-depressive feature subspace Und,
which maximizes ID-related feature retention.
Subspace decomposition exhibits two critical properties:
(1) Disentanglement, where two sub-features are maximally
decoupled across orthogonal subspaces, UT
ndUd = 0, and (2)
Reconstructability, enabling approximate signal recovery via
S
≈Undα + Udβ. These properties jointly establish the
theoretical foundation for deploying subspace decomposition
in our framework.
3.2. Differential Privacy
Differential Privacy (i.e., DP) [37], [38] is a rigorous math-
ematical framework designed to protect individual data privacy
in statistical analyses and machine learning. It ensures that the
presence or absence of any single individual’s data in a dataset
has a negligible impact on the algorithm’s output, preventing
adversaries from inferring sensitive information about specific
participants.
Under Differential Privacy (DP), for two neighboring
datasets D and D (which differ by exactly one record, e.g.,
D = D ∪x), the (ϵ, δ)-Differential Privacy requirement states
that for all possible output subsets S ⊆Range(A):
Pr[A(D) ∈S] ≤eϵ · Pr[A(D′) ∈S] + δ,
(2)
Here, ϵ is the privacy budget which controls the strength of
privacy guarantees. δ is the failure probability, which allows a
small probability of violating the privacy bound. And A is the
randomized algorithm.
We proposed a model variant that implements Differential
Privacy and conducted corresponding ablation studies. The
implementation and results are reported in 4.2 and 5.7
3.3. Progressive Training
Progressive Training refers to a strategy where multiple
submodules of a model are trained in a specific sequence
or priority, typically divided into multiple stages. Each stage
focuses on optimizing parameters of a specific component,
ultimately achieving overall performance improvement through
combination or joint fine-tuning. Its strength lies in progressive
enhancement — gradually introducing complex functionalities
across stages — and dynamic adaptability, which allows flexible
adjustments to subsequent training strategies based on interme-
diate results.
TABLE 1
A brief summary of representative methods.
Method
PRE
REC
F1
ACC
Unsupervised Autoencoder [27]
85%
80%
83%
-
MFCC-based RNN [28]
75%(70%)
95%(26%)
84%(38%)
74%
Feature Fusion based on spectral analysis [29]
83%
100%
91%
85%
Attentive LSTM Network [30]
-
-
94.01%
90.2%
Graph Neural Network [24]
92.36±2.53%
92.18±1.55%
92.23±2.01%
92.21±1.86%
MFCC & CNN generated spectrogram features [25]
86.4%(93.4%)
93.6%(85.9%)
89.85%(89.5%)
90.26%
Voice-based Pre-training Model [26]
93.96%(97.65%) 94.87%(97.21%) 94.41%(97.43%) 96.48%
* This table only lists existing methods and their reported results on DAIC-WOZ dataset. Due to differences in experimental
setups, these results cannot be directly compared. The strength of our model lies in its ability to process encrypted data, and
therefore the accuracy on raw data is not the focus of our investigation.
Progressive Learning is commonly employed in adversarial
training, such as in Generative Adversarial Networks (i.e.,
GANs), where the generator and discriminator are alternately
trained to compete and learn from each other [39]. Additionally,
it is applied to Cascaded Models, where submodels are trained
sequentially following a processing pipeline, and to Mixture
of Experts (i.e., MoE), where multiple submodels (”experts”)
specialize in different input subspaces and dynamically combine
their outputs through a gating mechanism [40].
In our implementation, the model involves multiple loss
functions and components serving distinct purposes. To opti-
mize training, we adopt Progressive Learning, leveraging its
capability for progressive enhancement, and dynamically adjust
training configurations based on task-specific requirements to
maximize performance.
4. System Design
This section presents the proposed scheme design, which
utilizes the Subspace Decomposition of two heterogeneous fea-
tures. The framework remains secure and trustable even when
Party B attempts to illegally access or misuse the data.
4.1. System Overview
The general design of our model is shown by 2, which is
composed of Three main parts: Subspace Decomposition Auto
Encoder, Noise-Based Encrpytor and VPM Classifier.
Subspace Decomposition Auto Encoder The SDAE is
designed to disentangle raw audio inputs into two mutually
orthogonal latent subspaces, isolating Depression-related fea-
tures and the non-depressive features by enforcing orthogonality
constraints during training. It retains the ability to reconstruct
the original input through feature recombination and further
supports privacy-preserving data encryption by selectively per-
turbing non-depressive components via encryption.
Adjustable Noise Encryptor Drawing inspiration from De-
noising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs), our encryptor
employs a controlled hierarchical noise infusion mechanism
designed to fulfill three critical requirements: (1) ensuring
secure data transformation, (2) maintaining model-processable
signal integrity, and (3) enabling adjustable encryption intensity.
Mirroring the progressive noise scheduling inherent to DDPMs,
this mechanism strategically introduces structured perturbations
across sequential diffusion steps.
VPM Classifier For the final classification layer, we ad-
here to the architectural configuration proposed in the Voice-
based Pretrained Model (VPM) framework: a simple fine-tuning
network is directly attached to the pretrained feature extractor
to serve as the ultimate classification head. This design de-
liberately avoids complex architectural modifications, retaining
only essential projection layers for task-specific adaptation.
Empirical results demonstrate that within our TAAC framework,
such a straightforward implementation suffices to achieve the
desired performance.
During the preprocessing stage, we implement a three-phase
audio preprocessing pipeline. At the foundational phase, we
perform uniform amplitude scaling based on peak values:
xnorm =
x
max(|x|)
This operation linearly maps each audio sample to the [-1,
1] range while preserving dynamic relationships. We adopt this
scaling to address inherent volume variations across datasets
and between individual recordings. This scaling process can be
conceptually regarded as a specialized form of normalization.
In phase II, we selectively extract participant-specific vocal
segments from raw audio and perform duration-adjusted intra-
subject reassembly — exclusively recombining speech clips
from the same individual based on their temporal lengths, such
that each recombined clip has an approximate duration of 2
second. This step filters out noises and interviewer speech
artifacts, adapted from [26], with a slight modification whereby
the recombination yields clips with an approximate duration of
2 seconds. The details will be introduced in Section 5.3.
In Phase III, we implement temporal resampling on all
recombined audio segments to achieve uniform time-series
lengths across samples. This temporal standardization ensures
extracted digital representations maintain identical temporal
dimensions—a prerequisite for consistent batch processing in
deep neural networks.
Bottleneck
Spatio-Temporal 
Feature Encoder 
Depression Feature Decoder
Non-Depressive Feature Decoder
Differentiating Features Subspace Decompositor (DFSD)
Non-Depressive
Features
Depression
Features
Orthogonality Loss
𝐿𝑜𝑟𝑡ℎ𝑜= 1
𝑁෍
𝑖=1
𝑁
𝒗𝑖
𝑑, 𝒗𝑖
𝑛𝑑
​Non-orthogonal penalty​
Reconstruction Loss
𝐿𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛= 1
𝑁෍
𝑖=1
𝑁
𝒗𝑖
𝑑+ 𝒗𝑖
𝑛𝑑−𝑥𝑖
2
2
𝑁𝑘= sin ∑𝑘𝑖𝑖cos(∑𝑘𝑖𝑖)
Adjustable
Encryption
Strength
Flexible Noise Encryptor (FNE)
Audio Data
Phase
Adaptive
Gate
𝑥𝑒𝑛𝑐= 𝑥+ ෍
𝑡=0
𝑇
𝛼𝑡⋅𝑁(𝑘)
Hash
Function
Noise
Generator
Noise Generator
Forward Noising Process
Forward
Noising
Process
VPM
CLassifier
Classifier
Gate α
For Phase I
Gate β
For Phase II
Gate γ
For Phase III
DFSD
FNE
DFSD
(Head 2)
VPM
Orth
Loss
Reco
Loss
Noise
Loss
Clas
Loss
Figure 2
General design of our proposed model.
4.2. Subsapce Decomposition Auto Encoder
Subsapce Decomposition Auto Encoder [41], [42] (Here-
after refer as SDAE) is a specialized variant of autoencoders
that integrates subspace decomposition techniques. Serving as
the ”gateway component” of our network architecture, it oper-
ates at the highest hierarchical level to decompose input data
into orthogonal subspaces, thereby enabling efficient feature
disentanglement.
The theoretical foundation of the Subspace Decomposition
Autoencoder (SDAE) is illustrated in Equation 3. Here, we
define the notation and their meanings: Und ∈Rd×k is the
Non-depressive feature. Ud ∈Rd×m is the Depression-specific
feature (note that Und is not the PII feature, a distinction
clarified in Section 3). α ∈Rk and β ∈Rm are coefficient
vectors, ϵ is the noise term. Based on our model’s architectural
design, we set k = m. Consequently, we define α = β = ⃗1.
S = Undα + Udβ + ϵ,
(3)
Prior to inputting audio into the model, specialized prepro-
cessing is required, including target speech extraction, duration-
based segmentation, and reintegration to meet the model’s input
specifications, as introduced in 4.1.
Within the Spatio-Temporal Feature Encoder, the audio
input is segmented and processed synchronously. This strat-
egy reduces computational complexity, lowers memory require-
ments during training, and accelerates convergence. The archi-
tecture employs three consecutive fully-connected (FC) layers
interleaved with nonlinear activation modules, coupled with
Residual Blocks (ResBlocks), to ensure precise extraction of
spatio-temporal feature representations. The encoded features
are subsequently propagated and refined as latent variables
within the bottleneck layer.
Two feature decoders are subsequently introduced to sep-
arately extract depression-specific features (Ud) and non-
depressive features (Und). These features reside in distinct
subspaces that are designed to be orthogonal and uncorrelated
– a critical property aligned with the subspace decomposition
framework, UT
ndUd = 0. Still, an additional requirement —
reconstructability — necessitates that the feature vectors from
both subspaces can be effectively recombined to reconstruct the
original audio. To jointly enforce these dual constraints, two
loss functions are introduced within the optimization frame-
work:
Lortho = 1
N
N
X
i=1
⟨v(d)
i
, v(nd)
i
⟩

|
{z
}
Non−orthogonal penalty
,
(4)
Lrecon = 1
N
N
X
i=1
∥v(d)
i
+ v(nd)
i
−xi∥
2
2,
(5)
In Equation 4, v(d)
i
and v(nd)
i
represent the depression and
non-depressive features of each sample in subspaces Ud and
Und (Ud = span{v(d)
1 , v(d)
2 , · · · , v(d)
N }, Similarly for Und).
This Orthogonality Loss is designed to enforce Ud and Und
to form mutually orthogonal subspaces.
Lemma 1 (Geometric Orthogonality). [43] Given two orthog-
onal matrices Qa, Qb ∈Rn×k, the following statements are
equivalent:
1)
Q⊤
a Qb = 0
2)
Qa ⊥Qb
3)
∀u ∈R(Qa), v ∈R(Qb) : ⟨u, v⟩= 0
4)
R(Qa) ∩R(Qb) = {0}
We aim to enforce sample-level orthogonality:
⟨v(d)
i
, v(nd)
j
⟩= 0, ∀i, j ∈1, ..., N,
(6)
The current Orthogonality Loss implicitly implements a
weakly-constrained formulation via the summation relaxation:
N
X
i,j=1
|⟨v(d)
i
, v(nd)
j
⟩| →0,
(7)
Thereby promoting the subspace orthogonality UT
ndUd = 0
based on Lemma 1.
In Equation 5, v(d)
i
and v(nd)
i
represent the depression and
non-depressive features of each sample in subspaces Ud and
Und, while xi represents the original signal of the audio sample.
By minimizing the Mean Squared Error (MSE) reconstruction
loss, we aim to ensure that the two sub-features decomposed by
the SDAE can optimally recombine to reconstruct the original
audio signal.
Both decoders adopt a three-layer FC architecture identical
to the encoder, complete with nonlinear activation modules,
ensuring consistent output feature dimensions across both path-
ways. These features will undergo phase-specific transforma-
tions — including encryption, fusion, or direct processing —
depending upon the current training phase’s operational require-
ments.
Differential Privacy is a rigorous privacy framework that
ensures the output of a data analysis algorithm does not reveal
whether any single individual’s data is included in the input
dataset. The formal definition and background are introduced
in Sec. 3.2.
In this work, we explore the integration of Differential Pri-
vacy into our model by constructing a variant trained with DP-
SGD (Differentially Private Stochastic Gradient Descent) [44].
Specifically, we apply DP-SGD to train the SDAE module, with
the goal of protecting latent variables from leaking user-specific
information. This is achieved by injecting calibrated Gaussian
noise during training to limit the influence of individual data
points. The theoretical correctness of DP-SGD has been for-
mally proven in prior work [38], [44].
DP-SGD modifies the standard SGD optimization procedure
in three main steps:
1)
Per-example gradient computation: Gradients are com-
puted for each example individually, rather than for the
entire batch.
2)
Gradient clipping: The ℓ2-norm of each per-example
gradient is clipped to a predefined threshold C to
bound the influence of any single example.
3)
Noise addition: Gaussian noise, scaled by C, is added
to the averaged gradient across the batch, ensuring that
the update satisfies (ε, δ)-differential privacy.
We evaluate the impact of this DP-preserving variant
through an ablation study in the experimental section 5.7,
analyzing how incorporating DP-SGD affects the performance
of our model.
4.3. Adjustable Noise Encryptor
The proposed encryption paradigm establishes a bijective
mapping between the original feature space U and the obfus-
cated space ˜U through a Deterministic Tensor Diffusion mech-
anism. As depicted in 1, the core lies in the key-conditioned
noise generation and parameterized diffusion scheduling.
Let x ∈X denote the raw feature vector and k ∈K
the secret key. The encryption process implements an iterative
nonlinear transformation:
˜x(t+1) = ˜x(t) + α(t) · Φ(Γ(k)),
(8)
where, Γ(k) = Pm
j=1 ki · j generates a key-specific hash
code. Φ(·) denotes the nonlinear projector: sin(·)cos(·). α(t) =
1 −t/T defines the annealed noise scheduler.
The noise pattern Φ(Γ(k)) is key-dependent yey input-
agnostic, ensuring that Ek[˜x|x] = x + ϵ, ϵ ∼N(0, σ2I). The
perfect reversibility is also achieved when k is known. The
decay factor α(t) follows a curriculum annealing strategy,
Algorithm 1 Deterministic noise-based encryption.
1: Input: Feature x, Key k, Steps T
2: Output: Obfuscated feature ex
3: Initialize ex(0) ←x
4: Compute key hash: Γ ←Pm
j=1 kj · j
5: Generate base noise: Φ ←sin(Γ) ⊙cos(Γ)
6: for t = 1 to T do
7:
α ←1 −t/T
8:
ex(t) ←ex(t−1) + α · Φ
9: end for
10: return ex(T )
which theoretically guarantees convergence.
During the encryption process, we modulate the encryption
strength by adjusting the value of parameter T, thereby achiev-
ing an optimal trade-off between confidentiality and accuracy,
demonstrated by subsequent experiments in section 5.
4.4. VPM Classifier
In terms of the output architecture, our model adopts the
strategic framework from the Voice-based Pre-training Model
(VPM) [26], where a compact fine-tuning network serves as
the final classification layers to generate depression prediction
scores.
Prior to the VPM Classifier, we implement a Phase-
Adaptive Gating Mechanism that dynamically regulates data
throughput according to three predefined training phases, ca-
pable of operating in three distinct modes: full transmission,
partial transmission, and complete blockage of data flow, gov-
erned by phase-dependent policies.
In the initial two tiers of the VPM architecture, we ar-
chitect a convolutional neural network (CNN) [45] backbone
incorporating batch normalization, nonlinear activation layers,
and dropout regularization. The terminal layer employs a fully-
connected projection head to map the refined representations
into depression classification logits.
For the classification loss, we employ the Cross Entropy
loss with label smoothing, a mathematically principled choice
for optimizing probabilistic predictions in depression detection:
LC =
PN
i=1(zi,yi −log(PK
k=1 ezik))
N
,
(9)
where zik represents the unnormalized logit value of the
i-th sample for class k, and yi denotes the ground-truth class
label. This loss function ensures stable optimization.
4.5. Various Training Phases
The framework is executed through three sequential training
phases. In Phase I, we focus on training the Differentiating
Features Subspace Decompositor (DFSD) to decompose raw
audio samples into two orthogonal subspaces—depressive and
non-depressive features—while strictly enforcing orthogonality
and reconstruction constraints. The encryptor remains untrained
as a deterministic module, where its output is fully determined
by predefined encryption keys and strength parameters. During
Phase II, the VPM Classifier is trained on unencrypted data,
which is reconstructed directly from the two subspaces, estab-
lishing baseline diagnostic performance for raw audio process-
ing. Finally, Phase III adapts the classifier to encrypted inputs:
non-depressive features are first encrypted and then recombined
with depressive features to synthesize privacy-preserving audio
samples. The VPM Classifier undergoes fine-tuning via back-
propagation on these encrypted samples.
Phase I In this training phase, we utilize three loss func-
tions: Orthogonality Loss, Reconstruction Loss, and Classifi-
cation Loss. The Orthogonality Loss and Reconstruction Loss
ensure the DFSD fulfills its core functionality, while the Classi-
fication Loss enforces strong relevance between depressive fea-
tures and depression detection. The combined effect of Orthog-
onality Loss and Classification Loss minimizes the diagnostic
influence of features from the other decoder.
During this phase, the DFSD and VPM Classifier are em-
ployed. The depression-related features are fed directly into
the VPM Classifier to compute the Classification Loss. While
the Classification Loss is backpropagated through the entire
network, the Orthogonality Loss and Reconstruction Loss gra-
dients only update the DFSD. To prioritize DFSD training, we
introduce a hyperparameter to amplify the emphasis on Orthog-
onality/Reconstruction Losses and attenuate the Classification
Loss influence.
Phase II Subsequently, we proceed to Phase II. During
this and subsequent phases, DFSD’s parameters are frozen to
preserve its orthogonality and reconstruction constraints. The
depression and non-depressive features extracted by DFSD are
reintegrated and fed into the VPM Classifier (without encryp-
tion). This training phase is dedicated to training a model
capable of processing unencrypted data.
Phase III In the final Phase III, the DFSD’s parameters
remain frozen. The encrypted non-depressive features are fused
with depression features and fed into the VPM Classifier for
training, establishing a model optimized for processing en-
crypted clinical audio data.
5. Experimental Evaluation
5.1. Dataset
We employ the dataset following established research con-
ventions — DAIC-WOZ (Distress Analysis Interview Corpus-
Wizard of Oz).
The Distress Analysis Interview Corpus (DAIC) contains
clinical interviews designed to support the diagnosis of psy-
chological distress conditions such as anxiety, depression, and
post traumatic stress disorder. The interviews are conducted
by humans, human controlled agents and autonomous agents,
and the participants include both distressed and non-distressed
individuals [17].
5.2. Implementation & Hyperparameters
Across
different
experimental
configurations,
certain
implementation-specific
hyperparameters
may
vary.
Here
we
present
the
standardized
experimental
protocols
and
hyperparameters consistently adopted across all trials.
All experiments were conducted on a single NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 4090 D GPU with 24GB VRAM, running under
Python 3.9.13.
The SDAE’s three-layer encoder-decoder architecture ex-
hibits feature dimensionalities of 32,000, 8,000, and 2,000
across successive layers. The weighting factors for orthogo-
nality loss and reconstruction loss are both set to 10, with
configurations: dropout rate = 0.2, learning rate = 1e-4, and
weight decay = 0.01.
The final depression classification task is formulated as a
binary classification problem, where the output 0/1 indicates
whether the individual doesn’t have depression (0 indicates
depression, 1 indicates no depression). We set the batch size to
32, with the total number of epochs set to 10. After conducting
grid experiments, we determined that the optimal threshold for
evaluating the model output is 0.4 — that is, if the predicted
score is greater than 0.4, it is classified as depressed; otherwise,
as non-depressed. Interestingly, this threshold coincides with the
proportion corresponding to the depression cut-off in the PHQ-
8 score (the PHQ-8 ranges from 0 to 24, and scores above 9
are considered indicative of depression, so 10
25 = 0.4).
In contrast, the PII identification task for each data point is
formulated as a pairwise comparison task, where the model is
presented with two data samples and outputs whether the two
audio recordings come from the same individual. This setup
simulates the real-world scenario in which malicious actors
exploit audio data by comparing it against a known database to
determine the source of the audio.
5.3. Data Preprocessing
To meet our specific experimental requirements and enhance
the data, we performed preprocessing on the dataset, consisting
of three stages: amplification, extraction/recombination, and
resampling. In the second stage, we decomposed the audio data
in DAIC-WOZ into 32,400 segments and recombined them into
9,753 audio clips. After the third stage, every clip can be loaded
into digital form of length 32000.
Additionally, in the Depression Detection task, we randomly
partitioned the dataset into ten different train-test splits, evalu-
ated the model on each split, and averaged the results to ensure
the robustness of the model. In the PII Identification task, we
randomly paired the data, resulting in 189 positive pairs and
611 negative pairs, for a total of 800 pairs of samples.
5.4. Metrics
In this paper, we leverage the following metrics to evaluate
the performance of the proposed architecture on depression
detection:
1)
Recall. Given a series of input data and the correspond-
ing outcomes, the recall can be defined as:
Recall =
TP
TP + FN ,
(10)
where TP, FN represent True Positive and False Neg-
ative, respectively. Recall measures the proportion of
actual positive cases that are correctly identified.
2)
Precision. Given a series of input data and the corre-
sponding outcomes, the precision can be expressed as:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP ,
(11)
where FP represents the False Positive. Precision mea-
sures the proportion of predicted positive cases that are
truly positive.
3)
F1-score. The F1-score can be represented as:
F1-score = 2 × Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall
.
(12)
The F1-score provides a harmonic mean of precision
and recall, balancing the two metrics.
4)
Accuracy. Given a series of input data and the corre-
sponding outcomes, the accuracy can be defined as:
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN ,
(13)
where TN represents True Negative. Accuracy mea-
sures the overall proportion of correctly classified cases.
In the PII Identification task, we will focus more on the
other three metrics.
5)
False Acceptance Rate (FAR). The False Acceptance
Rate is a metric used to evaluate the rate at which neg-
ative samples (i.e., non-matching cases) are incorrectly
accepted as positive in a classification or authentication
system. It can be defined as:
FAR =
FP
FP + TN ,
(14)
where FP represents the False Positive, and TN repre-
sents the True Negative. FAR indicates how frequently
the system incorrectly identifies a negative sample as
positive, which is a critical metric for security-sensitive
applications like biometric authentication.
6)
False Rejection Rate (FRR). The False Rejection Rate
measures the rate at which positive samples (i.e., match-
ing cases) are incorrectly rejected by the system. It can
be expressed as:
FRR =
FN
FN + TP ,
(15)
where FN represents the False Negative, and TP
represents the True Positive. FRR indicates how often
the system fails to correctly identify positive samples,
which is crucial for user experience in systems such as
facial recognition or fingerprint scanning.
7)
Equal Error Rate (EER). The Equal Error Rate is a
metric commonly used in biometric systems, such as
speaker recognition or face recognition. EER is the
point at which the False Acceptance Rate (FAR) equals
the False Rejection Rate (FRR). It represents a threshold
where both types of errors occur at the same rate.
Mathematically, it can be described as:
EER = FAR = FRR,
(16)
where FAR is the rate of incorrectly accepting a negative
sample as positive, and FRR is the rate of rejecting
a true positive. The EER provides a single value to
evaluate the trade-off between false positives and false
negatives at the operating point where they are balanced.
These three metrics are used because, in the speaker recog-
nition task, we focus on balancing the trade-off between false
acceptances (FAR) and false rejections (FRR), which directly
impact both security and user experience. FAR and FRR are
more relevant than Precision and Recall, as they better reflect
the system’s ability to correctly handle authorized and unautho-
rized users. At the same time, we will also report the Accuracy
result.
5.5. Evaluation of Depression Detection
The evaluations in this part primarily assess the performance
of TAAC on depression detection task, which contain depression
TABLE 2
Evaluation results on depression detection task.
Our Arthitecture - TAAC
ACC
REC
PRE
F1
Unencrypted
84.75%
0.88
0.86
0.87
Encrypted (Strength 5)
80.17%
0.88
0.85
0.86
Encrypted (Strength 10)
83.62%
0.92
0.84
0.88
Encrypted (Strength 25)
78.28%
0.91
0.8
0.85
Other Methods
ACC
REC
PRE
F1
Chaos Maps-Based Encryption
64.00%
0.72
0.83
0.77
Homomorphic Encryption
84.23%
0.88
0.86
0.87
detection on unencrypted data and on encrypted data. Since
the effect of encryption predominantly depends on encryption
strength and keys, we evaluate our modal on 3 different encryp-
tion strengthes from each of the 4 large-size keys across the
12 experimental scenarios. To ensure the full representation of
experimental effects in unfamiliar environments, the data used
for each testing session are not included in the training set.
To assess the usability of TAAC, we first evaluate the model
on unencrypted audios. As stated in 5.2, for each evaluation,
we set the batch size to 32, the total epochs to 10, and the
threshold to 0.4. The average results of cross validation are
reported in Tab. 2. The experimental findings demonstrate that
the proposed arthitecture effectively detects depression with
unencrypted audios.
The subsequent part of the evaluation focuses on the per-
formance of the model on encrypted audios. We evaluate our
model under three encryption strengths: 5, 10, and 25, and
report the average results obtained over experiments conducted
with four different keys for each strength. The average precision
is 86.5%, and the average recall is 86.2%. The experiments
confirm the system’s capability to accurately identify large-
size keys from a series of acoustic inputs. The recognition
of the Space and Enter keys exhibits slightly higher accuracy
compared to other keys, attributed to their distinctive timbre. Al-
though occasional identification errors may occur, these samples
can be easily deleted due to their significant offset in location
estimation.
Next, we assess the performance of our model against other
methods as part of an ablation study to validate the effectiveness
of our approach. Specifically, we conduct experiments using
two representative techniques: Chaos Maps-Based Encryption
[31], [46] and Homomorphic Encryption [34]. Following the
same experimental setup as before, we report their Accuracy,
Recall, Precision, and F1 scores for comparison in Tab. 2.
Finally, we also report the confusion matrices under four
different thresholds at encryption strengths of 10 and 25, as
shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, to further analyze the model’s
classification behavior and demonstrate how its performance
varies with different threshold settings.
As shown in Table 2, our model achieves an accuracy of
84.75% and an F1 score of 0.87 on the original (unencrypted)
data, which represents a strong performance. After applying
our Encryptor structure, the model maintains comparable per-
formance under a weak Encryption Strength of 5, achieving
an accuracy of 80.17%, with an F1 score nearly equivalent to
that on the unencrypted data. Even under a strong Encryption
Figure 3
Confusion matrix on depression detection with enc-
Strength 25.
Figure 4
Confusion matrix on depression detection with enc-
Strength 10.
Strength of 25, the model still achieves 78.28% accuracy and
an F1 score of 0.85. These results demonstrate that our model
meets the Accuracy requirement outlined in the Three Major
Challenges. Moreover, users can dynamically adjust the en-
cryption strength to balance between model accuracy and data
confidentiality.
It is worth noting that as the encryption strength increases,
the remaining depression-related information in the PII sub-
space becomes increasingly obfuscated. As a consequence,
we observe that the model tends to predict samples as non-
depressed. Combined with the issue of class imbalance in
the dataset—where non-depressive samples greatly outnumber
depressive ones—this bias leads to an increase in recall but a
drop in precision, with recall consistently remaining high.
As shown in Table 2, when applying Chaos Maps-Based
Encryption, the accuracy drops to only 64%. This demonstrates
that merely using existing encryption methods leads to complete
obfuscation of feature information, making it impossible for
the model to learn meaningful patterns from the data. While
Homomorphic Encryption achieves strong performance on the
Depression Detection task, the comparison in Fig. 5 reveals that
it fails to prevent malicious actors from stealing PII.
5.6. Performance of PII Extraction
We first report the statistical differences between the en-
crypted audio, the reconstructed audio, and the original audio
in Tab. 3. The reported metrics include MSE, MAE, and PSNR.
A lower MSE/MAE indicates higher similarity. PSNR (Peak
Signal-to-Noise Ratio) represents the ratio of signal power to
TABLE 3
Statistical differences between the encrpyted audio,
the reconstructed audio and the original audio.
Data - Method
MSE
MAE
PSNR
Encrypted (TAAC)
7.56
2.75
-30.02dB
Reconstructed (TAAC)
2.7e-4
1.0e-2
14.46dB
Encrypted (Chaos Maps-Based)
1.4e+7
2.7e+3
-1.91dB
Reconstructed (Chaos Maps-Based)
82.90
0.55
50.3dB
Encrypted (Homomorphic)
0.91
0.95
-20.82dB
Reconstructed (Homomorphic)
0.00
0.00
98.77dB
TABLE 4
Evaluation results on PII extraction task.
Our Arthitecture - TAAC
ACC
FAR
FRR
EER
Encrypted (Strength 5)
75.40%
0.48
0.01
0.26
Encrypted (Strength 10)
58.47%
0.83
0.01
0.3
Encrypted (Strength 25)
50.53%
0.97
0.02
0.49
Other Methods
ACC
FAR
FRR
EER
Unencrypted
100.00%
0
0
0
Chaos Maps-Based Encryption
51.06%
0.75
0.23
0.35
Homomorphic Encryption
99.74%
0.01
0
0.01
noise power. A higher PSNR indicates less distortion and better
quality.
From Tab. 3, it can be observed that audio encrypted using
the Chaos Maps-based method differs the most from the original
audio, offering the highest level of confidentiality. In contrast,
audio encrypted using the Homomorphic method shows less de-
viation from the source data but achieves the best reconstruction
fidelity. Our method lies between these two extremes.
Next, we evaluate the model’s performance on the PII
Extraction task following the experimental setup described in
Section 5.2. with a slight modification: multiple audio samples
from the same individual are concatenated into a longer audio
segment (ranging from 30 seconds to 1 minute), as the model
used for this task requires longer inputs to achieve reliable
comparison accuracy. The model used is the comparison model
provided by SpeechBrain [5]. The dataset is divided into 378
pairs, among which 189 pairs contain two audio samples from
the same individual, while the remaining 189 pairs are com-
posed of samples from different individuals. We report the
model’s performance in terms of Accuracy, FAR, FRR, and
EER in Tab. 4, with the threshold set to 0.85.
We first use the trained SDAE and the Encryptor under
different encryption strengths (5, 10, and 25) to encrypt the
data. The encrypted data is then passed to the verification model
for prediction. The results are shown in Table III. It is worth
noting that under full encryption, the verification model tends to
classify all audio samples as belonging to the same individual,
as the signals become completely randomized and chaotic —
which causes the accuracy to fluctuate around 50% at worst.
Next, we feed the original, unencrypted audio into the
model. This step is intended to demonstrate that the verification
TEA
(encStrength=10)
Chaos Maps-Based
Encryption
Homomorphic
Encryption
54 sec
83.62%
Depression Detection
Accuracy ↑
Inverse Average
Processing Time
Inverse
Reconstruction
Loss
Inverse PII
Extraction
Accuracy ↑
72.5 sec
64.00%
84.23%
152 sec
99.60%
0.00
57.27%
2.7e-4
82.90
51.06%
Figure 5
Radar chart comparison of the three encryption
methods.
Since lower values of PII Extraction Accuracy, Reconstruction Loss, and
Average Processing Time indicate better performance, we present their inverse
values in the figure to make the comparison more intuitive.
model possesses strong discriminative power and can accurately
determine whether two audio samples belong to the same
individual when the data is not obfuscated.
Finally, we also present the performance of the two afore-
mentioned encryption methods on the PII Extraction task within
Tab. 4, to compare it with their performance on the Depression
Detection task. In addition, we provide a visual comparison in
Fig. 5 to offer a more intuitive understanding of the Pros and
Cons.
One of the primary contributions of our work is the ability
to ensure the obfuscation and invisibility of PII within the
data, and the results in Tab. 4 demonstrate that our model
achieves this goal. When the data is unencrypted, the model
achieves 100% accuracy and an EER of 0, indicating that the
SpeechBrain model can perfectly identify whether two audio
samples come from the same individual in a clean setting.
However, after encryption, we observe a decrease in accuracy
and a significant increase in EER as the encryption strength
increases. At encryption strength of 25, the accuracy reaches
50.53%, and the EER increases to 0.49. A detailed analysis
reveals that after encryption, the model classifies nearly all
audio pairs as coming from the same individual, due to the
encrypted noises being highly similar to each other. As a result,
the FRR remains low, while the FAR becomes extremely high,
and the accuracy fluctuates around 50% at worst.
As shown in the Tab. 4 and Fig. 5, the results obtained from
data encrypted using Chaos Map-Based Encryption are compa-
rable to those achieved by our model under high encryption
strength. This demonstrates that our model provides a level of
PII protection similar to traditional encryption methods. How-
ever, unlike those methods, our model still retains the ability to
extract depression-related features from the encrypted audio. In
contrast, the accuracy and EER after Homomorphic Encryption
remain close to those of the unencrypted case, indicating that
although Homomorphic Encryption achieves good performance
on the Depression Detection task, it fails to adequately protect
PII information.
TABLE 5
Evaluation results on DP vs. non-DP.
ACC
REC
PRE
F1
Time †
non-DP
81.40%
0.96
0.84
0.90
24min
DP
76.00%
0.87
0.83
0.85
112min
† Here we report the average time required to train for
10 epochs across different splits.
5.7. Deep Dive into TAAC
The main purpose of this section is to demonstrate the
impacts of various factors, e.g., environmental factors, dataset-
related factors, and data processing factors, on the TAAC sys-
tem. To isolate the impact of individual factors on the experi-
mental results and effectively control variables, the experiments
in this section are conducted with the encryption strength
fixed at 10 and the threshold fixed at 0.4. Since the following
experiments are not strongly related to the main achievements
of our model, they are conducted using only a single key on
three splits.
5.7.1. Impact of DP-SGD. In this experimental setup, we con-
ducted experiments on both the DP and non-DP versions using
the configurations described above. During the experiments, we
observed that the DP version had significantly longer processing
times; therefore, we additionally report the average training time
of the models in the table. The experimental results are reported
in Tab. 5.
From the table, it can be seen that after applying DP, the
average processing time increased by 4 to 5 times, while the
accuracy decreased but remained within an acceptable range.
Since DP enhances security under the differentially private
setting, it can be offered as an optional feature for users.
5.7.2. Impact of Noises. In the DAIC-WOZ dataset, each orig-
inal audio contains the participant’s speech, the interviewer’s
speech, and background noise. Through data preprocessing, we
removed the interviewer’s voice and background noise from the
audio, ensuring a strong correlation between the data and the
participant in our experiments.
To evaluate the system’s robustness against noise, we con-
duct experiments under three different scenarios with varying
noise levels. The scenarios and corresponding noise types are
detailed in Tab. 6. Specifically, the noise intensity ranges from
43.31dB to 46.36dB. The results are reported in Tab. 7
As shown in the table, the accuracy slightly decreases
after introducing environmental When more third-party noise is
introduced, the accuracy drops substantially. Through analysis,
we find that the model tends to classify the interviewer’s voice
as non-depressive, leading to almost all samples being predicted
as non-depressive.
5.7.3. Impact of Various Audio Lengths. In the original
experimental setup, each audio was recombined to approxi-
mately 2 seconds. In this experiment, we evaluate the impact
on accuracy when the audio is recombined to different lengths.
The results are reported in Tab. 8
As shown in the Tab. 8, the experimental results are barely
affected by different audio lengths, indicating that under rel-
atively short durations, varying audio lengths do not have a
significant impact on our model. However, it is worth noting
TABLE 6
Scenarios and types of noises.
Scenarios
Type of noises
Clean
None
Environmental Noise
Ambient environmental noise (46.36dB, 10%)
Speech Noise
Ambient environmental noise (46.36dB, 10%), Interviewer’s speech noise (43.31dB, 10%)
TABLE 7
Evaluation results on noises
ACC
REC
PRE
F1
Clean
81.4%
0.96
0.84
0.90
Environmental Noise
79.88%
0.96
0.8
0.87
Speech Noise
75.2%
0.99
0.68
0.81
TABLE
8
Evaluation results on
various audio lengths
ACC
REC
PRE
F1
2 sec
81.4%
0.96
0.84
0.90
3 sec
80.6%
0.96
0.83
0.89
5 sec
81.2%
0.96
0.84
0.90
that as the audio length increases, the training cost grows expo-
nentially, and our training hardware can only support processing
up to a maximum audio length of 5 seconds. We present in Fig.
6 the changes in GPU memory requirements under different
audio lengths.
6. Conclusion
This paper presents a practical and trustworthy data pro-
cessing framework, TAAC, for performing depression detection
on audio data within a trustable setting. To address the trade-
off between encryption and accuracy, we leverage Subspace
Decomposition and propose a novel architecture, SDAE. Ex-
tensive experimental results demonstrate that, compared with
existing purely encryption-based methods such as Chaos Maps-
Based Encryption and Homomorphic Encryption, the proposed
system effectively balances accuracy and security—whereas
prior methods tend to ensure only one. Furthermore, by drawing
inspiration from diffusion models, we introduce a Adjustable
Noise Encryptor, enabling TAAC to preserve the original data
structure post-encryption. This allows the encrypted audio to
remain processable by the model. Additionally, the frame-
work incorporates an adjustable Encryption Strength parameter,
granting users the flexibility to balance accuracy and privacy,
thereby enhancing the system’s practicality. By varying key
experimental parameters, we further validate how different
Encryption Strength and Threshold settings impact both the
Depression Detection and PII Extraction tasks. With the in-
tegration of a VPM Classifier and the Progressive Training
method, the classification performance is further improved.
Even when handling noisy audio data or samples of varying
Figure 6
Changes of GPU memory requirements under dif-
ferent audio lengths (unit: MB).
lengths and sources, our model demonstrates robust and reliable
performance.
Our work discusses the risk that user audio data in
depression-detection systems may be misused by service
providers. This concern is not a novel disclosure; rather, it
reflects a widely recognized issue that has attracted substan-
tial attention from stakeholders, with existing national policies
already restricting abusive data practices.
The primary contribution of our paper is to introduce a tech-
nical approach that fundamentally eliminates the possibility of
such misuse. Following publication, we welcome engagement
with developers and vendors and encourage the adoption of
our approach in real-world systems. Through this work, we
intend to further emphasize to the public the importance of
safeguarding audio data and to encourage vendors to critically
re-examine their own security practices.
Our study makes use of the DAIC-WOZ dataset, a publicly
available corpus of clinical interviews designed to support the
diagnosis of psychological distress. The dataset was originally
collected by the University of Southern California (USC) In-
stitute for Creative Technologies. According to the original
publications and our investigation, the data collection procedure
received approval from the corresponding Institutional Review
Board (IRB), and all participants provided informed consent.
Although the dataset is publicly accessible, we adhered
strictly to ethical guidelines for handling sensitive data. We
clearly communicated our research intentions to the dataset
provider and obtained access only after approval of our ap-
plication. In our analysis, we used solely anonymized audio
data and relied on anonymized participant identifiers. No data
linking participants to their real-world identities was exposed
or processed at any stage of the study.
Acknowledgments
Anonymous for now.
References
[1]
World Health Organization, “Depressive disorder (depression),” https://
www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/depression, March 2023, [Ac-
cessed: Apr, 29, 2025].
[2]
World
Health
Organization,
“Depression
rates
by
country
2025,”
https://worldpopulationreview.com/country-rankings/
depression-rates-by-country, 2025, [Accessed: Apr, 29, 2025].
[3]
Yin Wu, Brooke Levis, Kira E. Riehm, Nazanin Saadat, Alexander W.
Levis, Marleine Azar, Danielle B. Rice, Jill Boruff, Pim Cuijpers, Simon
Gilbody, and et al., “Equivalency of the diagnostic accuracy of the phq-
8 and phq-9: a systematic review and individual participant data meta-
analysis,” Psychological Medicine, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1368–1380, 2020.
[4]
Kurt Kroenke,
“Phq-9: Global uptake of a depression scale,”
World
Psychiatry, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 135–136, 2021.
[5]
Mirco Ravanelli, Titouan Parcollet, Peter Plantinga, Aku Rouhe, Samuele
Cornell, Loren Lugosch, Cem Subakan, Nauman Dawalatabad, Abdelwa-
hab Heba, Jianyuan Zhong, Ju-Chieh Chou, Sung-Lin Yeh, Szu-Wei Fu,
Chien-Feng Liao, Elena Rastorgueva, Franc¸ois Grondin, William Aris,
Hwidong Na, Yan Gao, et al., “Speechbrain: A general-purpose speech
toolkit,” 2021.
[6]
Zhiyuan Yu, Yuanhaur Chang, Ning Zhang, and Chaowei Xiao, “SMACK:
Semantically meaningful adversarial audio attack,”
in 32nd USENIX
Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23), Anaheim, CA, Aug. 2023,
pp. 3799–3816, USENIX Association.
[7]
Jiahe Lan, Jie Wang, Baochen Yan, Zheng Yan, and Elisa Bertino,
“
FlowMur: A Stealthy and Practical Audio Backdoor Attack with Limited
Knowledge ,” in 2024 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP),
Los Alamitos, CA, USA, May 2024, pp. 1646–1664, IEEE Computer
Society.
[8]
Jiayu Ye, Yanhong Yu, Qingxiang Wang, Wentao Li, Hu Liang, Yunshao
Zheng, and Gang Fu,
“Multi-modal depression detection based on
emotional audio and evaluation text,”
Journal of Affective Disorders,
vol. 295, pp. 904–913, 2021.
[9]
Ying Shen, Huiyu Yang, and Lin Lin, “Automatic depression detection:
An emotional audio-textual corpus and a gru/bilstm-based model,”
in
Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). 2022, pp. 6247–6251, IEEE.
[10] Penghao Wang, Shuo Huai, Yetong Cao, Chao Liu, and Jun Luo, “Threat
from windshield: Vehicle windows as involuntary attack sources on au-
tomotive voice assistants,” in Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
Computer and Communications Security (CCS). 10 2025, ACM.
[11] Guangke Chen, Yedi Zhang, Fu Song, Ting Wang, Xiaoning Du, and
Yang Liu, “Songbsab: A dual prevention approach against singing voice
conversion based illegal song covers,” in Proceedings of the Network and
Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS). NDSS, 2025.
[12] Jiangyi Deng, Fei Teng, Yanjiao Chen, Xiaofu Chen, Zhaohui Wang,
and Wenyuan Xu,
“V-Cloak: Intelligibility-, naturalness- & Timbre-
Preserving Real-Time voice anonymization,” in 32nd USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security 23), Anaheim, CA, Aug. 2023, pp. 5181–
5198, USENIX Association.
[13] Haodi Wang, Kai Dong, Zhilei Zhu, Haotong Qin, Aishan Liu, Xiaolin
Fang, Jiakai Wang, and Xianglong Liu, “Transferable multimodal attack
on vision-language pre-training models,” in 2024 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (SP), 2024, pp. 1722–1740.
[14] Luming Yang, Lin Liu, Jun-Jie Huang, Zhuotao Liu, Shiyu Liang, Shao-
jing Fu, and Yongjun Wang, “Mm4flow: A pre-trained multi-modal model
for versatile network traffic analysis,” in Proceedings of the 32nd ACM
Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS). ACM,
2025.
[15] F. Ringeval, B. Schuller, M. Valstar, N. Cummins, R. Cowie, L. Tavabi,
M. Schmitt, S. Alisamir, S. Amiriparian, E.-M. Messner, S. Song, S. Liu,
Z. Zhao, A. Mallol-Ragolta, Z. Ren, M. Soleymani, and M. Pantic, “Avec
2019 workshop and challenge: State-of-mind, detecting depression with
ai, and cross-cultural affect recognition,” in Proceedings of the 9th In-
ternational Workshop on Audio/Visual Emotion Challenge and Workshop,
Nice, France, 2019, pp. 3–12.
[16] Kaiming Cheng, Jeffery F. Tian, Tadayoshi Kohno, and Franziska Roes-
ner,
“Exploring user reactions and mental models towards perceptual
manipulation attacks in mixed reality,” in 32nd USENIX Security Sym-
posium (USENIX Security 23), Anaheim, CA, Aug. 2023, pp. 911–928,
USENIX Association.
[17] J. Gratch, R. Artstein, G. M. Lucas, G. Stratou, S. Scherer, A. Nazarian,
R. Wood, J. Boberg, D. DeVault, S. Marsella, and D. R. Traum, “The
distress analysis interview corpus of human and computer interviews,” in
Proceedings of the 9th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
(LREC 2014), 2014, pp. 3123–3128.
[18] J. Yoon, C. Kang, S. Kim, and J. Han,
“D-vlog: Multimodal vlog
dataset for depression detection,” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 12226–12234, 2022, [Data
set].
[19] H. Cai, Y. Gao, S. Sun, N. Li, F. Tian, H. Xiao, J. Li, Z. Yang, X. Li,
Q. Zhao, Z. Liu, Z. Yao, M. Yang, H. Peng, J. Zhu, X. Zhang, X. Hu, and
B. Hu, “Modma dataset: A multi-modal open dataset for mental-disorder
analysis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.09283, 2020, [Data set].
[20] H. Fan, X. Zhang, Y. Xu, J. Fang, S. Zhang, X. Zhao, and J. Yu,
“Transformer-based multimodal feature enhancement networks for mul-
timodal depression detection integrating video, audio and remote pho-
toplethysmograph signals,”
Information Fusion, vol. 104, pp. 102161,
2024.
[21] R. Qin, K. Yang, A. Abbasi, D. Dobolyi, S. Seyedi, E. Griner, H. Kwon,
R. Cotes, Z. Jiang, G. Clifford, and R. A. Cook, “Language models for
online depression detection: A review and benchmark analysis on remote
interviews,” ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems, vol.
16, no. 2, pp. Article 12, 2025.
[22] Yongfeng Tao, Minqiang Yang, Huiru Li, Yushan Wu, and Bin Hu,
“Depmstat: Multimodal spatio-temporal attentional transformer for de-
pression detection,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engi-
neering, vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 2956–2966, 2024.
[23] Shu Wang, Kun Sun, and Qi Li,
“Compensating removed frequency
components: Thwarting voice spectrum reduction attacks,” in Proceedings
of the Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS).
NDSS, 2024.
[24] C Sun, M Jiang, L Gao, Y Xin, and Y Dong, “A novel study for depression
detecting using audio signals based on graph neural network,” Biomedical
Signal Processing and Control, vol. 88, pp. 105675, 2024.
[25] A. K. Das and R. Naskar, “A deep learning model for depression detection
based on mfcc and cnn generated spectrogram features,”
Biomedical
Signal Processing and Control, vol. 90, pp. 105898, 2024.
[26] X. Huang, F. Wang, and Y. Gao, “Depression recognition using voice-
based pre-training model,” Scientific Reports, vol. 14, pp. 12734, 2024.
[27] S. Sardari, B. Nakisa, M. N. Rastgoo, and P. Eklund,
“Audio based
depression detection using convolutional autoencoder,” Expert Systems
with Applications, vol. 189, pp. 116076, 2022.
[28] Emna Rejaibi, Ali Komaty, Fabrice Meriaudeau, Said Agrebi, and Alice
Othmani, “Mfcc-based recurrent neural network for automatic clinical
depression recognition and assessment from speech,” Biomedical Signal
Processing and Control, vol. 71, pp. 103107, 2022.
[29] Xiaolin Miao, Yao Li, Min Wen, Yongyan Liu, Ibegbu Nnamdi Julian,
and Hao Guo, “Fusing features of speech for depression classification
based on higher-order spectral analysis,”
Speech Communication, vol.
143, pp. 46–56, 2022.
[30] Yan ZHAO, Yue XIE, Ruiyu LIANG, Li ZHANG, Li ZHAO, and
Chengyu LIU, “Detecting depression from speech through an attentive
lstm network,” IEICE TRANSACTIONS on Information, vol. E104-D, no.
11, pp. 2019–2023, November 2021.
[31] E. A. Albahrani, T. K. Alshekly, and S. H. Lafta, “A review on audio
encryption algorithms using chaos maps-based techniques,” Journal of
Computer Science and Network Security, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 53–82, 11
2021.
[32] B. Ustubioglu, B. K¨uc¸¨uku˘gurlu, and G. Ulutas,
“Robust copy-move
detection in digital audio forensics based on pitch and modified discrete
cosine transform,” Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 81, pp. 27149–
27185, 2022.
[33] A. S. Alanazi, N. Munir, M. Khan, et al.,
“A novel design of audio
signals encryption with substitution permutation network based on the
genesio-tesi chaotic system,” Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 82,
pp. 26577–26593, 2023.
[34] L. Nguyen, B. Phan, L. Zhang, and et al., “An efficient approach for
securing audio data in ai training with fully homomorphic encryption,”
TechRxiv, 2024, Preprint.
[35] Ruixiang Deng, Yingwei Zhang, Chaomin Luo, and Zhuming Bi, “Mul-
timode process monitoring based on common and unique subspace de-
composition,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 20, no.
9, pp. 10933–10945, 2024.
[36] Xiangtian Meng, Bingxia Cao, Lingda Ren, Fenggang Yan, Maria Greco,
and Fulvio Gini, “Virtual array modeling and performance analysis of
half-dimensional real-valued subspace decomposition method,”
Signal
Processing, vol. 240, pp. 110371, 2026.
[37] Jinshuo Dong, Aaron Roth, and Weijie J. Su,
“Gaussian differential
privacy,”
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical
Methodology, vol. 84, no. 1, pp. 3–37, 02 2022.
[38] Jalpesh Vasa and Amit Thakkar,
“Deep learning: Differential privacy
preservation in the era of big data,” Journal of Computer Information
Systems, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 608–631, 2023.
[39] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David
Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio, “Gen-
erative adversarial networks,”
Commun. ACM, vol. 63, no. 11, pp.
139–144, Oct. 2020.
[40] William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer, “Switch transformers:
Scaling to trillion parameter models with simple and efficient sparsity,”
Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 23, no. 120, pp. 1–39, 2022.
[41] Gehang Zhang, Jiawei Sheng, Shicheng Wang, and Tingwen Liu, “Noise-
disentangled graph contrastive learning via low-rank and sparse subspace
decomposition,” in ICASSP 2024 - 2024 IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2024, pp. 5880–
5884.
[42] Yaganteeswarudu Akkem, Saroj Kumar Biswas, and Aruna Varanasi,
“A comprehensive review of synthetic data generation in smart farming
by using variational autoencoder and generative adversarial network,”
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, vol. 131, pp. 107881,
2024.
[43] W.L. Burke, Spacetime, Geometry, Cosmology, Dover Publications, 2020.
[44] Takao Murakami, Yuichi Sei, and Reo Eriguchi, “ Augmented Shuffle
Protocols for Accurate and Robust Frequency Estimation Under Differ-
ential Privacy ,” in 2025 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP),
Los Alamitos, CA, USA, May 2025, pp. 3892–3911, IEEE Computer
Society.
[45] Jiadong Lou, Xu Yuan, Rui Zhang, Xingliang Yuan, Neil Zhenqiang
Gong, and Nian-Feng Tzeng, “ GRID: Protecting Training Graph from
Link Stealing Attacks on GNN Models ,”
in 2025 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (SP), Los Alamitos, CA, USA, May 2025, pp.
2095–2113, IEEE Computer Society.
[46] Liron David, Omer Berkman, Avinatan Hassidim, David Lazarov, Yossi
Matias, and Moti Yung, “Extended diffie-hellman encryption for secure
and efficient real-time beacon notifications,” in 2025 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (SP), 2025, pp. 4406–4418.
