Resolving gradient pathology in physics-informed
epidemiological models
Nickson Golooba1 and Woldegebriel Assefa Woldegerima1*
1Disease-informed Modeling, Methods & Systems (DIMMS) Lab, Department of
Mathematics and Statistics, York University, Toronto, Canada
*corresponding author: wassefaw@yorku.ca
Abstract
Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) are increasingly used in mathematical epi-
demiology to bridge the gap between noisy clinical data and compartmental models, such
as the susceptible-exposed-infected-removed (SEIR) model. However, training these hybrid
networks is often unstable due to competing optimization objectives. As established in
recent literature on ŌĆ£gradient pathology,ŌĆØ the gradient vectors derived from the data loss
and the physical residual often point in conflicting directions, leading to slow convergence or
optimization deadlock. While existing methods attempt to resolve this by balancing gradient
magnitudes or projecting conflicting vectors, we propose a novel method, conflict-gated
gradient scaling (CGGS), to address gradient conflicts in physics-informed neural networks
for epidemiological modelling, ensuring stable and efficient training and a computationally
efficient alternative. This method utilizes the cosine similarity between the data and physics
gradients to dynamically modulate the penalty weight. Unlike standard annealing schemes
that only normalize scales, CGGS acts as a geometric gate: it suppresses the physical con-
straint when directional conflict is high, allowing the optimizer to prioritize data fidelity, and
restores the constraint when gradients align. We prove that this gating mechanism preserves
the standard O(1/T) convergence rate for smooth non-convex objectives, a guarantee that
fails under fixed-weight or magnitude-balanced training when gradients conflict. We demon-
strate that this mechanism autonomously induces a curriculum learning effect, improving
parameter estimation in stiff epidemiological systems compared to magnitude-based baselines.
Our empirical results show improved peak recovery and convergence over magnitude-based
methods.
Keywords: Physics-informed neural networks; gradient pathology; Conflict-Gated Gradient
Scaling; epidemiological modeling; cosine similarity; convergence rates in non-convex optimiza-
tion.
1
Introduction
Mathematical epidemiology has traditionally relied on compartmental models, such as the
susceptible-exposed-infected-removed (SEIR) framework, to understand how infectious diseases
spread. These models are valuable because they follow strict conservation laws and biological
logic [7]. However, they are often too rigid to capture the complex, noisy reality of actual clinical
data. On the other hand, deep learning approaches are excellent at fitting data but often fail
to respect biological rules, leading to predictions that may violate basic constraints, such as
keeping population counts positive.
In recent years, physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) [6, 11] have emerged as a way to
combine the strict biological rules of the SEIR model with the flexible data-fitting power of
1
arXiv:2603.23799v1  [cs.LG]  25 Mar 2026
1
INTRODUCTION
neural networks. The standard objective of these frameworks is to force the model to fit the
clinical data while simultaneously respecting the differential equations of epidemiology.
However, achieving this balance in practice is mathematically challenging. The network must
minimize two different errors at the same time, that is to say, the error from the noisy data
and the error from the physical equations. Often, the gradient vector from the data loss points
in a different direction than the gradient vector from the physics loss. This phenomenon was
formally described by Wang et al. [15] as Gradient Pathology. When these gradients conflict,
the optimization process can stall or oscillate, failing to find a solution that satisfies both the
biology and the data.
There are several existing ways to handle this problem, but they have limitations in this specific
context. One common approach is Learning Rate Annealing (LRA) [15], which balances the
losses based on the size (magnitude) of their gradients. While this stops one loss from dominating
the other, it ignores the direction; it does not tell the optimizer what to do when the gradients
are pointing in opposite directions. Another approach is Gradient Surgery (PCGrad) [16], which
projects conflicting gradients onto a normal plane. While effective, this method is computationally
expensive. Even recent variants like GCond [1], which attempt to reduce this cost via gradient
accumulation, are primarily designed for large-scale computer vision tasks rather than the specific
stiffness constraints found in epidemiological differential equations. More recently, researchers
have proposed second-order optimization methods, such as SOAP [14], or conflict-free updates
like ConFIG [9] to align these gradients using curvature information. Some have even attempted
to use cosine similarity against the total gradient [13]. While highly accurate, these methods often
entail significant computational overhead or magnitude bias compared to standard first-order
optimizers like Adam.
To bridge this gap, we propose a novel method, Conflict-Gated Gradient Scaling (CGGS), to
address gradient conflicts in physics-informed neural networks for epidemiological modelling,
ensuring stable and efficient training. Instead of projecting gradients or calculating complex
curvature matrices, we introduce a simple geometric ŌĆ£gateŌĆØ into the loss function. Our method
calculates the cosine similarity between the data gradient and the physics gradient. If they point
in opposite directions (conflict), the method automatically lowers the weight of the physical
constraint, allowing the model to learn the data trend first. As the gradients align, the weight
increases to enforce the biology. This creates an autonomous curriculum that stabilizes training
without the high computational cost of second-order methods. Our method is a dynamic,
geometry-based approach to modulate the physics gradient based on gradient alignment.
Our main contributions are as follows:
1. We formulate a hybrid loss landscape for SEIR modelling that integrates continuous
differential equations with discrete logical constraints to prevent biological violations.
2. We analyze the specific ŌĆ£Gradient PathologyŌĆØ in stiff epidemiological models, showing that
directional conflict often leads to optimization deadlock.
3. We propose the CGGS algorithm. Unlike standard magnitude balancing, CGGS uses
geometric alignment to dynamically switch between data-priority and physics-priority
modes, ensuring robust convergence even with noisy data.
4. We prove that CGGS converges to first-order stationary points of the data loss at the
standard O(1/T) rate for smooth non-convex objectives (Theorem 4.7), a guarantee that
fails under fixed-weight training when gradients conflict (Proposition 3.1). We further
confirmed that the proposed CGGS avoids Pareto deadlock and ensures robust convergence
even under gradient conflict.
2
2
MATHEMATICAL FORMULATION
2
Mathematical formulation
We consider the problem of approximating the dynamics of an infectious disease over a time
domain Ōä”= [0, T]. Let the state of the system be represented by a vector-valued function
u(t) = [S(t), E(t), I(t), R(t)]T , which we approximate using a deep neural network parametrized
by weights and biases ╬Ė, denoted as u╬Ė(t).
2.1
The compartmental constraint (ODE)
We adopt the Susceptible-Exposed-Infected-Removed (SEIR) model as our continuous governing
equation. This is a standard framework in epidemiology that tracks the flow of the population
between four compartments. In the context of scientific machine learning, we do not solve these
equations forward in time; rather, we compute the residual error of the networkŌĆÖs output against
the differential operators.
The residual vector F(u╬Ė, t) is defined as:
F(u╬Ė, t) =
’Ż½
’Ż¼
’Ż¼
’Ż¼
’Ż¼
’ŻŁ
dS
dt + ╬▓ SI
N
dE
dt ŌłÆ╬▓ SI
N + ŽāE
dI
dt ŌłÆŽāE + ╬│I
dR
dt ŌłÆ╬│I
’ŻČ
’ŻĘ
’ŻĘ
’ŻĘ
’ŻĘ
’ŻĖ
,
(1)
where N is the total population, ╬▓ is the transmission rate, Žā is the incubation rate, and ╬│ is
the recovery rate. If the network perfectly models the disease dynamics, the squared norm ŌłźFŌłź2
should approach zero.
2.2
The logical constraint (discrete knowledge)
Standard PINNs rely solely on the ODE residuals to guide the network. However, neural
networks are universal approximators that do not naturally respect state-space boundaries.
A frequent issue in training is the emergence of ŌĆ£biological hallucinations,ŌĆØ such as negative
population counts, which are mathematically possible in the unconstrained function space but
biologically impossible.
To address this, we introduce a set of logical constraints. We require that all compartments
remain non-negative and that the cumulative count of Removed individuals (recoveries plus
deaths) is monotonically non-decreasing. We formulate these rules using the Rectified Linear
Unit (ReLU) as a penalty function:
Llogic(╬Ė) =
1
|Tcol|
X
tŌłłTcol
’Ż½
’ŻŁ
X
kŌłł{S,E,I,R}
ReLU(ŌłÆuk(t)) + ReLU (R(t) ŌłÆR(t + ╬┤t))
’ŻČ
’ŻĖ
(2)
Here, the first term imposes a penalty if any population compartment drops below zero, and the
second term imposes a penalty if the Removed population decreases over a time step ╬┤t.
2.3
The unified optimization problem
We formulate the training of the network as a multi-objective optimization problem. We seek
the parameters ╬ĖŌłŚthat minimize the total loss Ltotal:
╬ĖŌłŚ= arg min
╬Ė
(Ldata(╬Ė, D) + ╬╗phyLODE(╬Ė) + ╬╗logicLlogic(╬Ė))
(3)
3
3
GRADIENT PATHOLOGY AND SPECTRAL ANALYSIS
where Ldata is the Mean Squared Error (MSE) computed on the sparse clinical observations D,
and LODE is the mean squared residual of the differential equations computed on a dense set of
collocation points.
Crucially, standard approaches treat the weighting factors ╬╗phy and ╬╗logic as fixed hyperparame-
ters. However, as we demonstrate in the following section, this static formulation is susceptible
to severe optimization failures due to the conflicting spectral properties of the data and physics
manifolds.
3
Gradient pathology and spectral analysis
The convergence of the optimization problem defined in Eq. (3) is strictly dictated by the
geometry of the loss landscape. In this section, we analyze the behaviour of the gradient descent
update vector to understand why standard training often fails in epidemiological modelling.
Let gdata = Ōłć╬ĖLdata and gphy = Ōłć╬ĖLODE represent the gradient vectors associated with the
observational data and the physical constraints, respectively.
3.1
The gradient conflict regimes
In standard backpropagation, the update direction for the network parameters ╬Ė is determined
by the weighted sum of the individual gradients: gtotal = gdata + ╬╗gphy. However, effective
learning requires that these components work constructively. To quantify their interaction, we
utilize the cosine similarity metric, Scos, a standard measure in multi-task learning [16]:
Scos(╬Ė) =
gdata ┬Ę gphy
ŌłźgdataŌłźŌłźgphyŌłź.
(4)
A publication in 2025 [14] generalizes the pairwise cosine similarity to multiple gradients (more
than two loss terms). One popular alignment score for n gradient vectors g1, g2, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , gn, is:
A(g1, g2, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , gn) = 2
 Pn
i=1
gi
ŌłźgiŌłź
n
!2
ŌłÆ1.
Particularly, for n = 2, this exactly recovers the standard cosine similarity: A(g1, g2) = Scos(╬Ė),
given in (4).
Building on the classifications established in prior literature [15,16], we distinguish three distinct
regimes of optimization behavior based on this spectral alignment:
ŌĆó Cooperative regime (Scos > 0): Both gradients share a general descent direction. A
step decreases both the data error and the physical residual simultaneously. When there
is a high positive cosine (close to 1), the two loss terms ŌĆ£agreeŌĆØ on how to update the
parameters, yielding fast and stable convergence.
ŌĆó Orthogonal regime (Scos Ōēł0): The gradients are uncorrelated. There is no directional
agreement. Minimizing one objective does not necessarily aid or hinder the other.
ŌĆó Conflicting regime (Scos < 0): This is the pathological case. The data objective and
the physical objective demand parameter updates in opposing directions. When Scos is
negative, the gradients pull in conflicting directions, which is a major source of gradient
pathology in PINNs, causing slow convergence, oscillations, or getting stuck in poor local
minima. Particularly, a cosine close to ŌłÆ1 leads to a complete conflict.
4
4
PROPOSED METHOD: CONFLICT-GATED GRADIENT SCALING (CGGS)
3.2
Pareto stationarity and deadlock
The mathematical problem of the conflicting regime, Scos < 0 is not merely empirical, it is
a structural consequence of multi-objective optimization. A classical characterization due to
D┬┤esid┬┤eri [3] establishes that a point ╬Ė is Pareto-stationary with respect to multiple objectives if
and only if the origin lies in the convex hull of their gradients (Definition 1.1 and Lemma 1.2
in [3]). For two loss terms, this reduces to finding ╬▒ Ōłł[0, 1] such that ╬▒ gdata + (1 ŌłÆ╬▒) gphy = 0.
In PINNs for epidemiology, the fast incubation dynamics (E ŌåÆI, governed by Žā) and the slow
transmission dynamics (S ŌåÆE, governed by ╬▓SI/N) operate on widely separated timescales.
During early training, the network has not yet resolved this scale separation, and the physics
residual drives gphy into directions that oppose gdata. When a magnitude-balanced weight
╬╗ = ŌłźgdataŌłź/ŌłźgphyŌłźhappens to match the conflict ratio, the gradients cancel exactly, as we
stated in the following proposition.
Proposition 3.1 (Pareto deadlock under fixed weights). Let gdata and gphy be non-zero gradient
vectors satisfying gdata = ŌłÆc gphy for some c > 0. Then the magnitude-balanced weight
╬╗std = ŌłźgdataŌłź
ŌłźgphyŌłź
yields a zero update:
gtotal = gdata + ╬╗std gphy = 0.
The optimizer perceives this as a stationary point and halts, despite both Ldata and LODE
remaining large.
Proof. Since gdata = ŌłÆc gphy, we have ŌłźgdataŌłź= c ŌłźgphyŌłź, hence ╬╗std = c.
We recall that gtotal = gdata + ╬╗std gphy. So, substituting gdata = ŌłÆc and ╬╗std = c, we obtain
gtotal = (ŌłÆc gphy) + c gphy = 0.
Moreover, setting ╬▒ = 1/(1 + c) Ōłł(0, 1) yields ╬▒ gdata + (1 ŌłÆ╬▒) gphy =
1
1+c(gdata + c gphy) = 0,
which is exactly the Pareto-stationarity condition of D┬┤esid┬┤eri [3].
Hence, we have gtotal = gdata + ╬╗std gphy = 0.
This result explains the baseline failures observed in Section 5.1. The standard PINN with fixed
weights is not failing because the network architecture is inadequate, nor because the data is too
noisy; it is failing because the loss landscape contains Pareto-stationary traps induced by the
stiffness of the SEIR equations. A geometrically aware mechanism is therefore necessary, not
merely helpful, to break this symmetry.
4
Proposed method: Conflict-Gated Gradient Scaling (CGGS)
Current state-of-the-art methods, such as Learning Rate Annealing (LRA) [15], attempt to
mitigate gradient pathologies by balancing the magnitudes of the gradient vectors (i.e., ╬╗ ŌłØ
ŌłźŌłćLdataŌłź/ŌłźŌłćLphyŌłź). However, as identified in Section 3.2, magnitude balancing is insufficient
when the gradient vectors are directionally conflicting. In such regimes, simply equalizing the
magnitudes can lead to a ŌĆ£stalemateŌĆØ where the optimizer oscillates without progress.
To address this, we introduce CGGS, conceptually visualized in Figure 1.
5
4
PROPOSED METHOD: CONFLICT-GATED GRADIENT SCALING (CGGS)
4.1
The update rule
We propose a composite weighting scheme that modulates the Lagrange multiplier based on
both spectral alignment (cosine similarity) and magnitude ratio. The adaptive parameter ╦å╬╗(t)
for the physical constraint is updated as follows:
╦å╬╗(t) = ╬▒╦å╬╗(tŌłÆ1) + (1 ŌłÆ╬▒) ┬Ę
ŌłźŌłćLdataŌłź
ŌłźŌłćLphyŌłź+ ŽĄ
|
{z
}
Magnitude Balance
┬Ę Žā(╬║ ┬Ę Scos)
|
{z
}
Conflict Gate
(5)
where:
ŌĆó Scos =
ŌłćLdata┬ĘŌłćLphy
ŌłźŌłćLdataŌłźŌłźŌłćLphyŌłźis the pairwise cosine similarity.
ŌĆó Žā(┬Ę) is the sigmoid function, acting as a soft gate.
ŌĆó ╬║ is a scaling factor (set to 5.0 in our experiments) to sharpen the transition.
ŌĆó ╬▒ is a momentum term to smooth the trajectory.
The complete training procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. At each iteration, the method
computes a single additional inner product (gdata ┬Ę gphy) and two gradient norms, yielding a
per-step overhead of O(|╬Ė|), identical to standard backpropagation.
Algorithm 1 CGGS training for epidemiological PINNs
Require: Network u╬Ė; clinical data D; collocation grid T ; learning rate ╬Ę; gate sharpness ╬║;
momentum ╬▒; regularization ŽĄ; fixed logical weight ╬╗logic
Ensure: Trained parameters ╬ĖŌłŚ
1: Initialize ╬Ė(0),
╦å╬╗(0) ŌåÉ1.0
2: for t = 0, 1, . . . , T ŌłÆ1 do
3:
gdata ŌåÉŌłć╬ĖLdata(╬Ė(t), D)
4:
gphy ŌåÉŌłć╬ĖLODE(╬Ė(t), T )
5:
glogic ŌåÉŌłć╬ĖLlogic(╬Ė(t), T )
6:
Scos ŌåÉ
gdata ┬Ę gphy
max
 ŌłźgdataŌłźŌłźgphyŌłź, ŽĄ

// Eq. (4)
7:
╦å╬╗(t) ŌåÉ╬▒ ╦å╬╗(tŌłÆ1) + (1 ŌłÆ╬▒) ┬Ę
ŌłźgdataŌłź
ŌłźgphyŌłź+ ŽĄ ┬Ę Žā(╬║ ┬Ę Scos)
// Eq. (5)
8:
d(t) ŌåÉgdata + ╦å╬╗(t) gphy + ╬╗logic glogic
9:
╬Ė(t+1) ŌåÉ╬Ė(t) ŌłÆ╬Ę d(t)
10: end for
11: return ╬Ė(T)
Three design choices are worth emphasizing in the context of epidemiological modelling. First,
the data anchor (╬╗data = 1) ensures that clinical observations always drive the fit; no amount of
ODE conflict can suppress the data term. Second, the logical constraint weight is held fixed
because non-negativity of S, E, I, and R is a hard biological requirement that must always
be enforced, unlike the physics loss, which can be temporarily relaxed during conflict. Third,
the exponential moving average (EMA, momentum ╬▒) prevents the gate from responding to
single-step noise in the gradient estimates, important when training on the sparse, irregular
sampling schedules typical of clinical surveillance data. During our sensitivity experiments across
╬▒ Ōłł[0.8, 0.99], the final losses varied by less than 25% on a single seed. At ╬▒ = 0.99, the ╦å╬╗
trajectory showed a visibly delayed response to conflict transitions. Therefore, we adopt ╬▒ = 0.9,
which is also the conventional default for first-moment EMA in adaptive optimization.
6
4
PROPOSED METHOD: CONFLICT-GATED GRADIENT SCALING (CGGS)
Figure 1: Conceptual visualization of CGGS. (Left) The data and physics gradients conflict
(opposing directions). (Center) Standard Magnitude Balancing (LRA) equalizes the lengths
but ignores the angle. The resultant update vector (black) is minimized, leading to optimization
stagnation (ŌĆ£DeadlockŌĆØ). (Right) CGGS detects the negative cosine similarity and ŌĆ£gatesŌĆØ
(shrinks) the physics gradient. The resultant update vector (green) follows the data gradient,
allowing the optimizer to escape the local minimum.
4.1.1
Differentiation from prior art
It is crucial to distinguish CGGS from existing gradient manipulation techniques:
ŌĆó Vs.
Learning Rate Annealing (LRA) [15]: LRA scales weights based solely on
gradient magnitudes. As shown in our ablation study later, magnitude balancing fails to
account for directional conflict. CGGS extends LRA by introducing the cosine-based gate.
ŌĆó Vs. PCGrad [16]: PCGrad resolves conflict by projecting the gradient vector onto the
normal plane of the conflicting task. While effective, this projection operation scales poorly
(O(K2)) and can discard useful information. CGGS retains the original gradient direction
but modulates its scale via the gate (O(K)), acting as a soft filter rather than a hard
projection.
ŌĆó Vs. Total-Gradient Weighting: Recent works like [13] have proposed weighting based
on similarity to the total gradient vector. We deliberately avoid this. The total gradient
is dominated by the largest component; comparing a component against the total often
masks true conflict. By using a pairwise metric (Scos between Data and Physics), CGGS
explicitly detects when the physical constraint fights the data, independent of their relative
magnitudes.
4.1.2
Design choices and stability
Design of the gating function: The choice of the sigmoid function Žā(┬Ę) is deliberate. While soft
gating mechanisms based on cosine similarity are well-established in neural network architectures
for feature routing, most notably in Mixture-of-Experts models [12], their application to the
optimization landscape of PINNs is novel. By adapting this architectural mechanism to gradient
scaling, we create a differentiable path that allows for smooth transitions between conflict and
cooperation, avoiding the instability inherent in hard thresholds.
The anchor strategy: Unlike approaches that adapt all loss coefficients simultaneously, we fix
╬╗data = 1 and adapt ╬╗phy relative to it. This ŌĆ£anchoringŌĆØ strategy is critical. By holding the
data term constant, we ensure that the optimization objective does not collapse to zero in the
event of severe conflict (where the gate Žā ŌåÆ0). This guarantees that the data fidelity term
remains the primary driver of gradient descent when physical constraints are suppressed.
7
4
PROPOSED METHOD: CONFLICT-GATED GRADIENT SCALING (CGGS)
Treatment of logical constraints: The gating mechanism is applied exclusively to the physical
residual term Lphy. The logical constraint Llogic maintains a fixed weight (╬╗logic = 1). We
exclude Llogic from adaptive gating because logical constraints, such as non-negativity, represent
absolute biological boundaries, not soft priors. Gating this term would allow the model to violate
physical reality to fit outliers. Furthermore, the ReLU-based logical loss is sparse, which leads
to numerical instability in cosine calculations.
4.2
Convergence analysis
Having established that fixed-weight PINNs can stall at Pareto-stationary traps (Proposition 3.1),
we now show that the CGGS mechanism avoids these traps and converges at the standard rate
for smooth non-convex optimization.
To isolate the core contribution of the conflict gate, the analysis below considers the instantaneous
CGGS update (momentum ╬▒ = 0) applied to the data-physics pair. The logical constraint,
whose weight is held fixed and whose gradient is sparse in practice (Section 4.1.2), is treated
as a bounded perturbation (Remark 4.9). The extension to ╬▒ > 0 is discussed in Remark 4.8.
This separation is standard in the optimization literature: momentum and auxiliary terms are
included in Algorithm 1 for practical stability but omitted from the convergence proof to isolate
the descent guarantees of the gate itself.
We impose the following regularity conditions.
Assumption 4.1 (Smoothness). Ldata is continuously differentiable and L-smooth (i.e., the
gradient is L- Lipschitz continuous). That is, ŌłźŌłćLdata(╬Ė) ŌłÆŌłćLdata(╬ĖŌĆ▓)ŌłźŌēżL Ōłź╬Ė ŌłÆ╬ĖŌĆ▓Ōłźfor all ╬Ė, ╬ĖŌĆ▓.
Assumption 4.2 (Bounded below). LŌłŚ= inf╬Ė Ldata(╬Ė) > ŌłÆŌł×.
Assumption 4.3 (Bounded gradients). The gradient norms are bounded along the optimization
trajectory: supt Ōłźgdata(╬Ėt)ŌłźŌēżG and supt Ōłźgphy(╬Ėt)ŌłźŌēżG for some G < Ōł×.
Assumptions 4.1 - 4.2 are standard in the analysis of first-order methods [5,10]. Assumption 4.1
holds for networks with smooth activations (tanh, softplus) on the bounded time domain [0, T];
Assumption 4.2 is immediate since Ldata is a mean squared error. Assumption 4.3 holds whenever
the network outputs and their parameter gradients remain bounded along the optimization
trajectory. In our SEIR experiments, the logical loss restricts all compartments to [0, N], the
input domain [0, T] is compact, and the activations tanh are globally Lipschitz with constant 1.
By the chain rule, ŌłźŌłć╬ĖLŌłźŌēżC ŌłźŌłćuLŌłźwhere C depends on the network depth, width, and
activation Lipschitz constants; since the outputs and losses are bounded, the parameter gradients
inherit this bound along any finite optimization trajectory.
For the remainder of this section, we define the instantaneous CGGS weight (setting ╬▒ = 0):
╬╗(t) =
ŌłźgdataŌłź
ŌłźgphyŌłź+ ŽĄ Žā
 ╬║ Scos

,
(6)
and the core update direction:
d(t) = gdata + ╬╗(t) gphy.
(7)
4.2.1
Boundedness of the adaptive weight
Lemma 4.4 (Uniform Boundedness). Under Assumption 4.3, the instantaneous weight (6)
satisfies
0 < ╬╗(t) < G
ŽĄ
ŌłĆt Ōēź0.
Moreover, for any ╬▒ Ōłł[0, 1), the EMA-smoothed weight ╦å╬╗(t) = ╬▒ ╦å╬╗(tŌłÆ1) + (1 ŌłÆ╬▒) ╬╗(t) satisfies
╦å╬╗(t) Ōēż╬ømax Ōē£max
 ╦å╬╗(0), G/ŽĄ

.
8
4
PROPOSED METHOD: CONFLICT-GATED GRADIENT SCALING (CGGS)
Proof. Since Žā(┬Ę) Ōłł(0, 1) and ŌłźgphyŌłź+ ŽĄ ŌēźŽĄ, from (6) and using Assumption 4.3, we get
0 < ╬╗(t) < G/ŽĄ, where G > 0 is an upper bound constant as introduced in Assumption 4.3.
For the EMA, set B = G/ŽĄ. The recursion ╦å╬╗(t) < ╬▒ ╦å╬╗(tŌłÆ1) + (1 ŌłÆ╬▒) B is contractive with fixed
point B: unrolling gives ╦å╬╗(t) = ╬▒t ╦å╬╗(0) + B (1 ŌłÆ╬▒t) Ōēżmax(╦å╬╗(0), B).
4.2.2
Descent direction under gradient conflict
Du et al. [4] proved (their Proposition 1) that a hard binary gate based on gradient cosine
similarity guarantees convergence to critical points of the main loss. The CGGS sigmoid gate is
a smooth generalization of this binary mechanism. The following result quantifies the descent
constant.
Lemma 4.5 (Sufficient descent). Let d(t) be the core update direction (7) with the instantaneous
weight (6). Define
M╬║ Ōē£max
sŌłł[0,1]
s
1 + e╬║s ,
which depends only on the gate sharpness ╬║. Then

d(t), gdata

Ōēź(1 ŌłÆM╬║) ŌłźgdataŌłź2
ŌłĆt.
Furthermore, Ōłźd(t)ŌłźŌēż2 ŌłźgdataŌłź.
Proof. Assuming the gradients are not vanishingly small (ŌłźgdataŌłźŌłźgphyŌłź> ŽĄ, which holds
whenever training has not already converged), expand the inner product:
Ō¤©d(t), gdataŌ¤®= ŌłźgdataŌłź2 + ╬╗(t) Ō¤©gphy, gdataŌ¤®
= ŌłźgdataŌłź2 
1 +
ŌłźgphyŌłź
ŌłźgphyŌłź+ ŽĄ
|
{z
}
Ōłł(0, 1)
┬Ę Scos Žā(╬║ Scos)

.
(8)
In the cooperative regime (Scos Ōēź0), the second factor is non-negative, giving Ō¤©d(t), gdataŌ¤®Ōēź
ŌłźgdataŌłź2.
In the conflict regime (Scos < 0), write Scos = ŌłÆ|Scos| and observe that |Scos| Žā(ŌłÆ╬║ |Scos|) =
|Scos|/(1 + e╬║ |Scos|) ŌēżM╬║. Since the ratio ŌłźgphyŌłź/(ŌłźgphyŌłź+ ŽĄ) < 1, the bracketed term in (8) is
at least 1 ŌłÆM╬║ > 0.
For the step-size bound: Ōłźd(t)ŌłźŌēżŌłźgdataŌłź+ ╬╗(t) ŌłźgphyŌłźŌēżŌłźgdataŌłź+
ŌłźgdataŌłź
ŌłźgphyŌłź+ŽĄ ŌłźgphyŌłź< 2 ŌłźgdataŌłź,
where we used Žā(┬Ę) < 1 and ŌłźgphyŌłź/(ŌłźgphyŌłź+ ŽĄ) < 1.
Remark 4.6. Since s Žā(ŌłÆ╬║s) Ōēżs/2 ŌēżŽā(0) = 1/2 for all s Ōłł[0, 1] and ╬║ Ōēź0, Lemma 4.5
guarantees a descent constant c Ōēź1/2 regardless of the gate sharpness ╬║. Convergence is
therefore assured even for a poorly chosen ╬║. For ╬║ = 5 (our experimental setting), the bound
is substantially tighter: numerical evaluation gives M5 Ōēł0.056, achieved near |Scos| Ōēł0.26, so
c Ōēł0.94, the descent direction retains at least 94% of the full gradient-descent step magnitude.
In the extreme case Scos = ŌłÆ1, the suppression is even stronger: Žā(ŌłÆ5) Ōēł0.0067, and the update
reduces to d(t) Ōēłgdata, recovering the escape from Pareto deadlock (Proposition 3.1).
4.2.3
Convergence rate
Theorem 4.7 (Convergence of CGGS). Let Assumptions 4.1 - 4.3 hold, d(t) be the core
update (7) with the instantaneous weight (6), c = 1 ŌłÆM╬║, and ╬Ę Ōēżc/(4L). Then the iterates
9
4
PROPOSED METHOD: CONFLICT-GATED GRADIENT SCALING (CGGS)
╬Ėt+1 = ╬Ėt ŌłÆ╬Ę d(t) satisfy:
min
0Ōēżt<T
ŌłćLdata(╬Ėt)
2 Ōēż2
 Ldata(╬Ė0) ŌłÆLŌłŚ
c ╬Ę T
.
(9)
In particular, CGGS reaches an ╬Ą-stationary point of Ldata within T = O(1/╬Ą) gradient evalua-
tions.
Proof. By L-smoothness of Ldata [10], we have:
Ldata(╬Ėt+1) ŌēżLdata(╬Ėt) ŌłÆ╬Ę Ō¤©gdata, d(t)Ō¤®+ L╬Ę2
2
Ōłźd(t)Ōłź2.
(10)
From Lemma 4.5, we write
Ō¤©gdata, d(t)Ō¤®Ōēźc ŌłźgdataŌłź2 and Ōłźd(t)Ōłź2 Ōēż4 ŌłźgdataŌłź2.
(11)
Plugging (11) into (10), we get
Ldata(╬Ėt+1) ŌēżLdata(╬Ėt) ŌłÆ╬Ę
 c ŌłÆ2L╬Ę

ŌłźgdataŌłź2.
Since ╬Ę Ōēżc/(4L), we have c ŌłÆ2L╬Ę Ōēźc/2 > 0, so:
Ldata(╬Ėt+1) ŌēżLdata(╬Ėt) ŌłÆc ╬Ę
2 Ōłźgdata(╬Ėt)Ōłź2.
Summing from t = 0 to T ŌłÆ1:
c ╬Ę
2
TŌłÆ1
X
t=0
Ōłźgdata(╬Ėt)Ōłź2 ŌēżLdata(╬Ė0) ŌłÆLdata(╬ĖT ) ŌēżLdata(╬Ė0) ŌłÆLŌłŚ.
Since the minimum of a set is at most its average, dividing this result by T yields (9), as
required.
The O(1/T) rate matches the classical complexity of gradient descent for L-smooth non-convex
objectives [5]. CGGS does not accelerate convergence; its theoretical contribution is robustness.
Fixed-weight PINNs stall at Pareto-stationary traps (Proposition 3.1); CGGS preserves the
standard convergence rate because the gate ensures a valid descent direction at every step.
Remark 4.8 (EMA momentum). Theorem 4.7 is stated for the instantaneous weight (╬▒ = 0).
When ╬▒ > 0, the EMA introduces a lag of approximately 1/(1 ŌłÆ╬▒) steps before ╦å╬╗(t) adapts to a
change in the conflict regime. During this transient, ╦å╬╗(t) may reflect a previous cooperative phase
while the current gradients are in conflict, temporarily reducing the effective descent constant.
For ╬▒ = 0.9 (our experimental setting), this lag is Ōēł10 steps, well within the relaxation phase
of Figure 3, where the data fit is improving rapidly, and the transient is absorbed. A formal
analysis of the EMA variant would require a joint Lyapunov argument over (Ldata, ╦å╬╗); we leave
this extension to future work.
Remark 4.9 (Logical constraint). The full Algorithm 1 includes the fixed-weight term ╬╗logic glogic.
Under Assumption 4.3, this acts as a bounded perturbation to the core update (7), introducing
an additive bias of order O(╬Ę ╬╗logic G) in each descent step. In our SEIR experiments, the
ReLU-based logical loss is sparse: the penalty is applied only when a compartment prediction is
negative or when the recovered population decreases unphysically, both of which occur rarely after
the initial training steps. Consequently, ŌłźglogicŌłźŌēł0 for the majority of the trajectory, and the
perturbation does not measurably affect the convergence behaviour.
10
5
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Remark 4.10 (Convergence target). Theorem 4.7 guarantees convergence to stationary points
of Ldata, consistent with the anchor strategy of Section 4.1.2 and the cosine-similarity weighting
framework of Du et al. [4]. This is appropriate for the epidemiological setting: the primary
objective is to fit the observed infection data. The physics constraint acts as a regularizer that
improves generalization when it cooperates with the data. In practice, the conflict gate opens
during the refinement phase (Figure 3, middle panel), restoring the full ODE penalty. The
converged solution thus satisfies both Ldata Ōēł0 and LODE Ōēł0, as confirmed experimentally in
Section 5.
Remark 4.11 (Relation to PCGrad). Yu et al. [16] proved that PCGrad converges except when
the task gradients are exactly anti-parallel (cos ŽĢ = ŌłÆ1); see their Theorem 1. This failure mode is
precisely the regime where CGGS activates: the gate detects Scos ŌēłŌłÆ1 and suppresses the physics
term, falling back to data-driven training. CGGS can therefore be viewed as complementary
to PCGrad: it handles the anti-parallel regime that PCGrad cannot, while avoiding the O(K2)
projection cost.
4.2.4
Curriculum learning interpretation
The convergence theory provides a rigorous underpinning for the empirical ŌĆ£dip-and-riseŌĆØ be-
haviour of ╦å╬╗(t) reported in Section 5.3.2. The two-phase dynamics can be understood as an
autonomous form of curriculum learning in the sense of Bengio et al. [2]:
ŌĆó Phase 1 (Relaxation): When the SEIR stiffness drives Scos below zero, the gate
suppresses ╦å╬╗(t), and Theorem 4.7 guarantees descent on Ldata. The network approximates
the coarse shape of the infection curve, the timing, and height of the peak, without
interference from the stiff ODE residuals.
ŌĆó Phase 2 (Refinement): As the data fit improves and the network begins to resolve the
timescale separation, the gradients align (Scos > 0). The gate opens, restoring the full ODE
penalty. The network now enforces conservation of the total population (N = S+E+I+R),
eliminates non-physical oscillations, and recovers smooth trajectories consistent with the
compartmental dynamics.
This sequential ŌĆ£data-then-physicsŌĆØ strategy is consistent with the findings of Krishnapriyan et
al. [8], who showed that curriculum-based scheduling significantly improves PINN convergence
for stiff PDE systems. A distinctive feature of CGGS is that the transition between phases is
determined automatically by the cosine similarity signal, without manual scheduling or prior
knowledge of the stiffness ratio Žā/╬▓.
5
Experimental results and discussion
We validated our hypothesis and proposed method on a synthetic SEIR outbreak simulation
(N = 1000, ╬▓ = 1.0, Žā = 0.2, ╬│ = 0.14). To mimic the scarcity and irregularity of real-world
clinical reporting, training data were generated by sampling only 20 noisy data points from the
ground truth infection curve (Itrue) with additive Gaussian noise N(0, 0.05).
5.1
Demonstration of Gradient Pathology
In our baseline experiment, we trained a standard PINN with fixed weights (╬╗ = 1). We
tracked the cosine similarity between the data gradient Ōłć╬ĖLdata and the physics gradient Ōłć╬ĖLphy
throughout the optimization process.
As established in Section 3.2, the similarity score frequently dropped below zero (see Figure 2,
Right panel). This indicates that the optimization vectors were opposing, leading to erratic
11
5
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
training behaviour where the model failed to converge to a physically meaningful solution.
Notably, without logical constraints or adaptive gating, the standard model predicted negative
infection counts, a biological impossibility (Figure 2, Left panel).
Figure 2: Baseline analysis of a standard PINN training on noisy SEIR data. (Left) The model
overfits the noise (blue solid curve) and fails to capture well the true dynamics. (Right) The
cosine similarity between data and physics gradients frequently drops below zero (dashed line),
indicating destructive optimization conflict where the objectives fight each other.
5.2
Performance of CGGS
We then applied our proposed CGGS method, and Figure 3 illustrates the training dynamics.
The resulting prediction (left panel, green line) demonstrates remarkable robustness. Despite the
significant noise in the training samples (red dots), the model recovered the smooth, unimodal
infection trajectory characteristic of the ground truth SEIR dynamics (black dashed line).
Figure 3: Performance of the proposed CGGS. (Left) The model recovers the true SEIR
trajectory (green solid curve) despite noise. (Center) The adaptive weight ╦å╬╗ shows the distinct
ŌĆ£relaxation-refinementŌĆØ phases. (Right) The gating mechanism successfully manages periods of
gradient conflict (negative cosine similarity) by ŌĆ£closing the gateŌĆØ (similarity lines jumping back
up).
5.3
Analysis of gradient dynamics
The novel contribution of this work is visualized in the Middle and Right panels of Figure 3,
which track the adaptive weight ╦å╬╗ and the gradient cosine similarity, respectively.
12
5
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
5.3.1
The conflict gate in action
The Right Panel reveals the volatility of the optimization landscape. The cosine similarity
frequently oscillates in negative territory (below the dashed zero line), confirming the gradient
conflict characterized in Proposition 3.1. In standard PINN formulations, these negative spikes
would cause destructive interference. However, our CGGS algorithm successfully identifies these
moments and ŌĆ£closes the gate,ŌĆØ preventing parameter updates that would violate the data
manifold.
5.3.2
The ŌĆ£Dip-and-RiseŌĆØ trajectory
The adaptive weight ╦å╬╗ (Middle Panel) exhibits a distinct two-phase behaviour driven by the
conflict gate:
ŌĆó Phase 1: Relaxation (Steps 0 - 250): In the early training phase, conflict is high.
The algorithm suppresses ╦å╬╗ (keeping it near 10ŌłÆ1), effectively relaxing the stiff physical
constraints to allow the neural network to approximate the coarse structure of the clinical
data.
ŌĆó Phase 2: Refinement (Steps 250 - 600): As the data fit improves, the gradients align
(entering the cooperative regime). The algorithm responds by exponentially increasing ╦å╬╗
(rising to > 100). This forces the network to adhere strictly to the differential equations,
smoothing out noise artifacts and ensuring that conservation laws are satisfied.
This dynamic behaviour confirms that static weighting schemes are insufficient and that angular
awareness (gating) is required to navigate the Pareto front of stiff biological systems. The
two-phase trajectory is precisely the autonomous curriculum predicted by the convergence theory
of Section 4.2: Theorem 4.7 guarantees descent on Ldata during Phase 1, while the gate opening
in Phase 2 restores the full ODE penalty as the gradients align.
5.4
Ablation study: Geometry vs. Magnitude
To rigorously evaluate the contribution of the spectral gating mechanism, we conducted an
ablation study comparing CGGS against the state-of-the-art Learning Rate Annealing (LRA)
method proposed by Wang et al. [15]. LRA dynamically scales weights based on gradient
magnitudes but ignores directional conflict (i.e., it effectively assumes Scos Ōēł1).
Figure 4: Ablation study. Comparison of the proposed CGGS method (Green) against the
standard LRA baseline (Blue). The LRA method relies solely on gradient magnitudes and
fails to recover the true infection peak, whereas the geometry-aware CGGS method successfully
resolves the conflict to fit the ground truth.
13
6
CONCLUSION
Figure 4 presents the comparative results:
ŌĆó Peak reconstruction: The baseline LRA method (Blue Line) fails to capture the peak
intensity of the infection, undershooting the true maximum by approximately 15%. This
suggests that magnitude balancing alone is insufficient to resolve the conflict between the
noisy data (which pulls the peak down) and the physics (which pushes the peak up).
ŌĆó Convergence behaviour: The loss landscape (Right Panel) reveals that LRA suffers
from early stagnation, plateauing around epoch 1000. In contrast, CGGS (Green Line)
leverages the conflict gate to bypass this local minimum, achieving a final convergence
error that is an order of magnitude lower.
This comparison confirms that geometric awareness, specifically the ability to shut off conflicting
gradients through the cosine gate, is the critical factor in enabling robust learning for stiff
epidemiological models.
6
Conclusion
In this work, we studied the challenges of conflicting gradients in PINNs applied to epidemiological
models like SEIR and proposed a novel solution called Conflict-Gated Gradient Scaling (CGGS)
to improve training stability and convergence. While Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs)
offer a promising avenue for integrating compartmental models with clinical data, our analysis
demonstrates that the optimization landscape is frequently characterized by directional conflict
between the data fidelity term and the physical residuals.
In PINNs for epidemiology, the data gradient and physics gradient often oppose each other,
leading to gradient conflict. The cosine similarity (Scos) measures the alignment between these
gradients, with negative values indicating conflict. Three regimes were identified: cooperative
(Scos > 0), orthogonal (Scos Ōēł0), and conflicting (Scos < 0).
We showed that standard magnitude-based balancing schemes, such as Learning Rate Annealing
[15], are insufficient to resolve these conflicts. When gradients are antiparallel, magnitude
balancing can inadvertently stabilize a Pareto-suboptimal point, leading to the optimization
deadlocks observed in our baseline experiments.
To overcome this, we proposed CGGS. By introducing a differentiable geometric gate based
on the pairwise cosine similarity between data and physical gradients, CGGS autonomously
induces a curriculum learning strategy. The empirical results confirm that this mechanism
successfully switches between a ŌĆ£relaxation phaseŌĆØ (prioritizing data to escape local minima) and
a ŌĆ£refinement phaseŌĆØ (enforcing physics to ensure biological validity). Crucially, our ablation
study confirms that geometric awareness is the key factor in recovering the true peak of the
infection curve, outperforming methods that rely solely on gradient norms.
We also presented the theoretical Guarantees of CGGS convergence: we prove that CGGS
maintains standard convergence rates in non-convex optimization under the assumptions of
smoothness, boundedness from below, and bounded gradients. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that the adaptive weight ╬╗(t) remains bounded and positive. We showed that the descent
direction d(t) guarantees sufficient decrease. We proved that the CGGS iterates converge to
first-order stationary points of the data loss at the standard O(1/T) rate (Theorem 4.7), a
guarantee that does not hold for fixed-weight or magnitude-balanced PINNs under gradient
conflict (Proposition 3.1).
Limitations and future work
: The convergence proof (Theorem 4.7) is stated for the
instantaneous weight (╬▒ = 0), while our experiments use EMA momentum (╬▒ = 0.9). As
14
REFERENCES
discussed in Remark 4.8, the EMA introduces a transient lag that is empirically absorbed into
the relaxation phase, but a formal Lyapunov-based convergence proof for the full EMA variant
remains open.
Furthermore, while we utilized a pairwise similarity metric to avoid the magnitude bias inherent in
total-gradient comparisons, this approach scales linearly with the number of physical constraints.
Future work will investigate the application of CGGS to high-dimensional spatial-temporal
PDEs and its performance on real-world, noisy COVID-19 datasets where measurement delays
introduce additional spectral complexity.
Funding statement
This research is funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Council of Canada (NSERC)
Discovery Grant (Appl No.: RGPIN-2023-05100), and Canadian Institute for Health Research
(CIHR) under the Mpox and Other Zoonotic Threats Team Grant (FRN. 187246).
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that there is no competing interest.
References
[1] Evgeny Alves Limarenko and Anastasiia Alexandrovna Studenikina. Gcond: Gradient
conflict resolution via accumulation-based stabilization for large-scale multi-task learning.
arXiv e-prints, pages arXivŌĆō2509, 2025.
[2] Yoshua Bengio, J┬┤er╦åome Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. Curriculum
learning. In Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine learning,
pages 41ŌĆō48, 2009.
[3] Jean-Antoine D┬┤esid┬┤eri. Multiple-gradient descent algorithm (mgda) for multiobjective
optimization. Comptes Rendus. Math┬┤ematique, 350(5-6):313ŌĆō318, 2012.
[4] Yunshu Du, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Siddhant M Jayakumar, Mehrdad Farajtabar, Razvan
Pascanu, and Balaji Lakshminarayanan. Adapting auxiliary losses using gradient similarity.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02224, 2018.
[5] Saeed Ghadimi and Guanghui Lan. Stochastic first-and zeroth-order methods for nonconvex
stochastic programming. SIAM journal on optimization, 23(4):2341ŌĆō2368, 2013.
[6] George Em Karniadakis, Ioannis G Kevrekidis, Lu Lu, Paris Perdikaris, Sifan Wang, and
Liu Yang. Physics-informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics, 3(6):422ŌĆō440, 2021.
[7] William Ogilvy Kermack and Anderson G McKendrick. A contribution to the mathematical
theory of epidemics. Proceedings of the royal society of london. Series A, Containing papers
of a mathematical and physical character, 115(772):700ŌĆō721, 1927.
[8] Aditi Krishnapriyan, Amir Gholami, Shandian Zhe, Robert Kirby, and Michael W Mahoney.
Characterizing possible failure modes in physics-informed neural networks. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 34:26548ŌĆō26560, 2021.
[9] Qiang Liu, Mengyu Chu, and Nils Thuerey. Config: Towards conflict-free training of physics
informed neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11104, 2024.
15
REFERENCES
[10] Yurii Nesterov. Introductory lectures on convex optimization: A basic course, volume 87.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
[11] Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis.
Physics-informed neural
networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving
nonlinear partial differential equations. Journal of Computational physics, 378:686ŌĆō707,
2019.
[12] Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hinton,
and Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts
layer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538, 2017.
[13] Junran Wang, Jixiao Wang, Yunpeng Li, and Weisheng Zhang. Cosine similarity-based
adaptive weighting for physics-informed neural networks. In 2024 6th International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Control, Measurement and Signal Processing (ICMSP), pages 791ŌĆō794.
IEEE, 2024.
[14] Sifan Wang, Ananyae Kumar Bhartari, Bowen Li, and Paris Perdikaris. Gradient alignment
in physics-informed neural networks: A second-order optimization perspective. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2502.00604, 2025.
[15] Sifan Wang, Yujun Teng, and Paris Perdikaris. Understanding and mitigating gradient flow
pathologies in physics-informed neural networks. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing,
43(5):A3055ŌĆōA3081, 2021.
[16] Tianhe Yu, Saurabh Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Chelsea
Finn. Gradient surgery for multi-task learning. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 33:5824ŌĆō5836, 2020.
16
