1
The Free-Market Algorithm: Self-Organizing
Optimization for Open-Ended Complex
Systems
Martin Jaraiz — Department of Electronics, University of Valladolid, Spain
March 2026
Abstract. We introduce the Free-Market Algorithm (FMA), a novel metaheuristic
optimization framework inspired by free-market economics. Unlike Genetic
Algorithms, Particle Swarm Optimization, Ant Colony Optimization, and Simulated
Annealing—all of which require a prescribed fitness function and search a fixed
solution space—FMA uses distributed supply-and-demand dynamics in which
fitness is emergent, the search space is open-ended, and solutions take the form of
complete hierarchical pathway networks rather than single optima. Autonomous
agents discover transformation rules, trade goods, open and close firms, and
compete for demand, with no centralized controller. We present the formal
algorithm, its three-layer architecture (universal market engine, pluggable domain
rules, domain-specific observation), and compare it systematically with established
metaheuristics. We further show that FMA provides a constructive mechanism for
the abstract signatures of selection described by Assembly Theory. The algorithm
has been validated in two unrelated domains: prebiotic chemistry—where it
discovers all 12 feasible amino acids, all 5 nucleobases, and the complete formose
sugar chain from bare atoms in under 5 minutes (Jaraiz, 2026b)—and
macroeconomic forecasting—where it achieves Mean Absolute Error (MAE) of 0.42
percentage points for non-crisis GDP prediction with zero calibrated parameters,
portable to 33 countries (Jaraiz, 2026a). These results suggest that Darwinian free-
market optimization constitutes a universal mechanism for selection across
complex systems.
Contents
2
1. Introduction
2. A Taxonomy of Complexity
2.1 Multibody Complexity
2.2 Assembly Complexity
2.3 Behavioral Complexity
2.4 Evolutionary Complexity
3. The Free-Market Algorithm
3.1 Design Principles
3.2 The Three-Layer Architecture
3.3 The Agent's Activity Cycle
3.4 Formal Pseudocode
3.5 Key Properties
3.6 Comparison with Existing Metaheuristics
4. Connection to Assembly Theory
4.1 Mapping AT Concepts to FMA
4.2 Three Dynamical Regimes
4.3 FMA as the Mechanism AT Describes
5. Application I: Prebiotic Chemistry
6. Application II: Macroeconomic Forecasting
7. Application III: Synthesis Route Planning
8. Why FMA Works: The Economics of Exploration
9. Discussion
9.1 FMA vs. GA: A Deeper Comparison
9.2 Universality
9.3 Limitations
10. Conclusions
11. References
1. Introduction
3
Complex systems resist forecasting because they violate the foundational assumptions of
most computational methods: they have no fixed phase space, no representative agent, and
no equilibrium to converge toward. An economy is not a system of equations to be solved
but an evolving ecology of heterogeneous firms. A prebiotic chemical mixture is not a
reaction network to be enumerated but an open-ended exploration of molecular space. In
both cases, the system continually generates novelty that could not have been predicted
from initial conditions.
Over the past fifty years, a rich family of metaheuristic algorithms has emerged, each
drawing inspiration from a different natural process: Genetic Algorithms1 from Darwinian
evolution, Particle Swarm Optimization2 from flocking behaviour, Ant Colony Optimization3
from pheromone-guided foraging, and Simulated Annealing4 from metallurgical cooling.
These methods have been applied successfully to scheduling, routing, parameter
estimation, and countless other domains.
Despite their diversity of metaphor, these algorithms share three structural assumptions
that limit their applicability to open-ended complex systems:
1. Prescribed fitness. The quality of every candidate solution is evaluated by a function
defined a priori by the designer. The algorithm does not decide what is valuable; it
only searches for more of what it has been told to value.
2. Fixed search space. The set of possible solutions is defined before the run begins. A
GA searches binary strings of length n; PSO moves particles through ℝd; ACO
constructs paths on a given graph. No new dimensions or building blocks appear
during execution.
3. Centralized selection. A global mechanism—tournament selection, global best
update, pheromone reinforcement, Boltzmann acceptance—decides which solutions
survive. Information about quality flows through a central bottleneck.
These assumptions are entirely reasonable when the problem is well-posed: when we know
what we are looking for, know the space in which to look, and can afford a central arbiter of
quality. But many of the most important problems in science and engineering violate all
three assumptions. In prebiotic chemistry, we do not know which molecules are "fit"—
fitness emerges from thermodynamic stability and mutual compatibility. In
macroeconomics, GDP is not a fitness function to be maximized but an emergent aggregate
of millions of interacting firms. In open-ended evolution, the search space itself grows as
new building blocks are discovered.
4
The economic insight. Adam Smith observed in 1776 that individuals pursuing their
own self-interest are "led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part
of [their] intention"9. Hayek formalized this as a distributed information-processing
mechanism: the price system aggregates knowledge that no central planner could
collect10. We take this insight literally. The market is not a metaphor for optimization
—it is an optimization algorithm, one whose key properties (emergent fitness, open-
ended search, distributed selection) are precisely what existing metaheuristics lack.
In this paper we introduce the Free-Market Algorithm (FMA), implemented as a Free-
Market Agent-Based Model (FM-ABM), a metaheuristic that uses the market mechanism as
a computational optimization framework. FMA's key innovations are:
Emergent fitness. No objective function is prescribed. "Fitness" emerges from what
the market demands and sustains.
Open-ended search space. A persistent recipe book grows during execution; each
discovery expands the space of possible future discoveries.
Distributed selection. No central controller selects winners. Agents independently
choose, compete, succeed or fail.
Hierarchical network solutions. The output is not a single optimum but a complete
production network with supply chains.
Persistent memory. The recipe book is never cleared, enabling hierarchical discovery
across arbitrary depth.
We present the formal specification, analyse its properties, compare it with established
algorithms, demonstrate its connection to Assembly Theory5, and summarize validated
results in prebiotic chemistry and macroeconomic forecasting.
2. A Taxonomy of Complexity
To understand what FMA is designed for—and why existing metaheuristics fall short—we
must first understand the landscape of complexity. Not all complex systems are alike, and
different kinds of complexity demand different computational tools.
5
A Taxonomy of Complexity
Multibody
N-body, stat. mech., fluids
Fixed phase space
No novelty generation
Assembly
Recursive construction
Growing phase space
Adjacent possible expands
Behavioral
Arbitrary decision rules
Rules themselves evolve
Heterogeneous interactions
Evolutionary Complexity
= Multibody + Assembly + Behavioral + Selection + Open-ended Novelty
+ Historical Contingency
The target of FMA / FM-ABM
Free-Market Algorithm (FM-ABM)
Physics suffices
(Boltzmann, MD)
Requires new
framework
Figure 1 | A taxonomy of complexity. Multibody systems have fixed phase spaces and are well-
served by physics. Assembly systems generate new possibilities through recursive construction.
Behavioral systems feature agents with arbitrary evolving rules. Evolutionary complexity is the
union of all three plus selection, open-ended novelty, and historical contingency—the target of
the Free-Market Algorithm.
2.1 Multibody Complexity
The simplest form of complexity arises from many particles interacting through known
forces: N-body gravitational systems, molecular dynamics, fluid turbulence. These systems
are conceptually straightforward—the equations of motion are known, conservation laws
constrain the dynamics, and Boltzmann statistics describe equilibrium. The difficulty is
purely computational: the phase space is vast but fixed. No genuinely new objects appear;
the set of possible states is determined at the outset. This is why statistical mechanics
succeeds: it needs only sample a pre-existing landscape.
2.2 Assembly Complexity
A qualitatively different kind of complexity emerges when objects are built recursively from
simpler ones: atoms combine into molecules, molecules into polymers, polymers into
functional complexes. Assembly Theory (AT), formalized by Sharma et al.5, provides a
rigorous framework for measuring this complexity through two quantities: the assembly
index (minimum recursive joining operations to construct an object from basic building
blocks) and the copy number (how many identical copies exist in a sample). AT's central
insight is that objects with both high assembly index and high copy number cannot arise
from undirected physics alone—they require selection.
6
The critical distinction from multibody complexity is that the phase space grows. Each newly
assembled object creates possibilities that did not exist before—what Kauffman8 calls the
"adjacent possible." A molecule that did not exist at step t becomes a potential reactant at
step t+1, opening pathways that were previously inaccessible.
2.3 Behavioral Complexity
A third form of complexity arises when agents follow arbitrary decision rules that need not
correspond to any assembly operation. A bank does not assemble anything when it sets
interest rates based on risk assessment. A government does not construct objects when it
allocates spending based on political priorities. A foraging animal does not join building
blocks when it selects a migration route. Yet these agents participate in systems every bit as
complex as molecular evolution—their interactions generate emergent patterns (business
cycles, ecosystem dynamics, social hierarchies) that no individual agent intends or controls.
The hallmark of behavioral complexity is that the rules themselves evolve: agents learn,
adapt, imitate, and innovate. No single equation captures the system, because the system's
dynamics depend on the heterogeneous, time-varying decision functions of its constituent
agents.
2.4 Evolutionary Complexity
The most challenging systems combine all three forms above with three additional
properties:
Selection: some variants persist and proliferate while others disappear, but the
selection criterion is not externally specified—it emerges from the system's dynamics.
Open-ended novelty: genuinely new entities appear that could not have been
predicted from initial conditions. The system continually expands its own state space.
Historical contingency: what exists now depends on what existed before. The same
initial conditions can produce radically different outcomes depending on the
sequence of events.
These are the systems—economies, ecosystems, technological evolution, prebiotic
chemistry—where forecasting has the greatest value and the least reliability. Traditional
forecasting methods fail because they assume fixed phase spaces, representative agents,
equilibrium convergence, and historically stable parameters. What is needed is a framework
that generates novelty endogenously, accommodates heterogeneous agents with diverse
7
and evolving rules, operates out of equilibrium, and produces selection without hand-
designed fitness functions. The Free-Market Algorithm provides such a framework.
3. The Free-Market Algorithm
3.1 Design Principles
FMA is built on a single foundational principle: strict separation of mechanism from
domain rules. The market mechanism—how agents trade, compete, enter and exit—is
universal and identical across all applications. The domain-specific rules—how goods are
created and whether transformations are feasible—are pluggable modules that encode
domain knowledge without prescribing what the system should find. This separation
ensures that selection emerges from market dynamics, not from the domain rules
themselves.
Three economic insights, taken literally as computational mechanisms, underpin the design:
Adam Smith's Invisible Hand
Individual agents pursue their own interest without knowledge of the global outcome.
Yet the collective result is a highly organized production network. In FMA, this is the
selection mechanism itself.
Hayek's Knowledge Problem
No single entity possesses the information needed for optimal allocation. Knowledge
is dispersed among agents. The trading mechanism aggregates distributed
information, achieving coordination without central planning.
Schumpeter's Creative Destruction
Entry and exit of firms is a feature, not a bug. Firms that produce unwanted goods
close, freeing agents to open new firms. This turnover balances exploration and
exploitation.
8
Clarification. FMA is not a simulation of an economy. It is an algorithm that uses
market dynamics as a computational mechanism, just as GA uses natural selection and
ACO uses pheromone-guided foraging. The claim is not that markets are optimal in
the normative sense, but that the market mechanism—distributed agents, local
information, supply-and-demand equilibration—is a powerful optimization primitive
that has been underexploited in the metaheuristic literature.
3.2 The Three-Layer Architecture
FMA achieves domain generality through a strict three-layer separation:
Layer
Responsibility
Changes
across
domains?
Examples
Layer 1:
Market
Engine
Agent lifecycle, ring
topology, trading, firm
entry/exit, demand
propagation, decay
No—
identical in
all domains
Ring neighbourhood,
GFCF demand,
patience threshold
Layer 2:
Domain
Rules
DomainCombine()  and
DomainValidate() —how
goods are created and
whether transformations are
feasible
Yes—
pluggable
per domain
Chemistry: BDE + UFF
energy. Economics: I–
O coefficients.
Robotics: task
dependencies
Layer 3:
Observation
Domain-specific metrics
computed from the market
state
Yes—read-
only, no
feedback
Chemistry: molecular
census, assembly
index. Economics:
GDP, sectoral output
This separation means that the market mechanism (Layer 1) is a universal optimization
engine. To apply FMA to a new domain, one writes only the combination/validation rules
(Layer 2) and the observation metrics (Layer 3). The trading, competition, discovery and
demand mechanisms require no modification.
9
FM-ABM Three-Layer Architecture
Layer 1: Market Mechanism
UNIVERSAL
Workers
(ring neighborhoods)
Goods
(supply & demand)
Producers
(competition & exit)
GFCF Demand
(selection driver)
Witness
(memory)
Layer 2: Domain-Specific Behavioral Rules
PLUGGABLE
Chemistry
BDE/UFF energy evaluation
Bond formation, ring closure
Economics
I-O table coefficients
Labor/capital factors
Banking / Policy
Interest rates, risk models
Regulation, tax policy
Biology
Foraging, mating
Territory, social hierarchy
Layer 3: Observation & Measurement
DOMAIN-SPECIFIC (read-only)
Molecular census
Assembly index, diversity
GDP, employment
Sector output, firm size
Systemic risk, stability
Policy effectiveness
Population dynamics
Biodiversity indices
Figure 2 | FM-ABM three-layer architecture. Layer 1 (market mechanism) is universal and
identical across all applications. Layer 2 (behavioral rules) is pluggable—different domains supply
different rules for how agents interact and transform goods. Layer 3 (observation) extracts
domain-specific measurements from the simulation state. Selection emerges from market
dynamics (Layer 1), not from the domain rules (Layer 2).
3.3 The Agent's Activity Cycle
Each simulation step, every agent executes a five-phase economic cycle—the "Workshop
Manager's Day":
The Agent's Activity Cycle (one simulation step)
1. Discover
Combine inventory with
neighbor goods
= AT's tau_d (discovery)
2. Trade
Demand & acquire goods
(GFCF / domain utility)
= AT's alpha (selection)
3. Produce
Transform inputs into
outputs via recipes
= AT's tau_p (production)
4. Compete
Close unprofitable firms;
start new ones if demand
= creative destruction
5. Decay
Stochastic decomposition;
recycle to building blocks
= recycling pressure
Next simulation step
Figure 3 | The agent's activity cycle. Every agent executes five phases each simulation step. The
cycle maps directly onto Assembly Theory's dynamical processes: Discover controls tau_d, Trade
implements alpha, Produce controls tau_p, Compete provides creative destruction, and Decay
recycles resources. No phase is designed for AT—the mapping is emergent.
Phase 1: DISCOVER. A bounded number of discovery attempts (the budget) are made per
step. Each attempt picks a random agent, selects a good from its inventory, selects a good
from a random neighbour's inventory, and asks the domain-specific combination function
10
to propose a product. If the domain-specific validation function accepts the product (e.g.,
negative energy change in chemistry, feasible input–output coefficients in economics), a
new recipe is added to the persistent recipe book, and the discovering agent receives a
"witness sample" of the product.
Phase 2: TRADE. Each agent inspects the recipe book and expresses demand for the goods
it prefers. Under GFCF demand, agents prefer the most complex (highest-depth) goods
available, creating a demand cascade: demand for a depth-3 molecule generates derived
demand for its depth-2 inputs, which generates demand for depth-1 inputs, and so on. This
is the "invisible hand"—nobody plans the supply chain; it emerges from individual
preferences. Agents that have opened a producer attempt to buy the inputs they need from
neighbours.
Phase 3: PRODUCE. If all inputs are secured, production occurs. Trade is strictly local: an
agent can only buy from its k ring neighbours, not from arbitrary agents. This locality
creates spatial structure and prevents trivially optimal allocation.
Phase 4: COMPETE. Firms that cannot sell their output accumulate losses. After a patience
threshold, they close. Idle agents survey unmet demand in their neighbourhood and may
open a new firm to fill the gap. This is Schumpeter's creative destruction: the entry and exit
of firms is the algorithm's mechanism for balancing exploration and exploitation.
Phase 5: DECAY. Goods in inventories stochastically decompose into their component
parts, with a decay rate proportional to their complexity. Decay serves two purposes: it
recycles material back into the pool of simple building blocks, preventing resource lock-up;
and it acts as a selection pressure against goods that are merely complex without being
demanded (demanded goods are continually replenished by production).
3.4 Formal Pseudocode
FMA(N agents, domain_rules, max_iterations)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
Initialize: N agents on ring, each with one primary good
RecipeBook ← ∅
for t = 1 to max_iterations:
  // Phase 1: DISCOVER (exploration)
  for budget times:
    agent_i ← random worker
    good_A  ← from agent_i.inventory
    good_B  ← from random neighbor's inventory
11
    product ← DomainCombine(good_A, good_B)
    if DomainValidate(product):           // e.g., ΔE < 0
      RecipeBook ← RecipeBook ∪ {(A, B) → product}
      agent_i.inventory += product        // witness sample
  // Phase 2: DEMAND (selection signal)
  for each agent:
    wishlist ← SelectPreferred(RecipeBook)   // GFCF
    RecordDemand(wishlist)
  // Phase 3: TRADE & PRODUCE (distributed exchange)
  for each agent with producer:
    for each input needed:
      seller ← FindInNeighborhood(input)
      if seller: Transfer(input, seller → agent)
    if all inputs available:
      output ← Produce(recipe)
      agent.inventory += output
  // Phase 4: COMPETE (market selection)
  for each agent with producer:
    if unprofitable for too long:
      CloseProducer()                     // creative destruction
  for each idle agent:
    if unmet demand exists:
      StartProducer(demanded_recipe)      // entrepreneurship
  // Phase 5: DECAY (recycling)
  for each good in all inventories:
    if random() < DecayRate(good):
      Decompose(good) → components       // returns to pool
return RecipeBook, all inventories, production_network
3.5 Key Properties
Property 1: Emergent fitness. FMA has no prescribed objective function. What
counts as "fit" is determined by the interplay of discovery, demand and competition. A
molecule that is thermodynamically stable, demanded by consumers, and efficiently
producible from available inputs will be sustained by the market. Fitness is a systems
property, not a scalar function.
Property 2: Open-ended search space. The recipe book starts empty and grows
monotonically. Each new recipe potentially enables the discovery of higher-depth
products that were previously unreachable. This is a computational realization of
12
Kauffman's "adjacent possible"8: the set of things that can be explored expands with
each exploration. No existing metaheuristic has this property.
Property 3: Distributed selection. Selection in FMA is fully decentralized. No global
fitness ranking exists. Each agent makes local decisions (what to demand, what to
produce, when to close). The emergent behaviour—complex production networks,
supply chains, specialization—arises from these local interactions. This is the
computational analogue of Hayek's insight that the price system is a distributed
computer10.
Property 4: Persistent memory. The recipe book is never cleared. Unlike GA (where
each generation is memoryless) or SA (which has no memory), FMA accumulates
knowledge across all iterations. This memory is essential for hierarchical discovery: a
depth-3 product can only be discovered after its depth-2 inputs have been
discovered, which requires the depth-1 recipes to persist.
Property 5: Two timescales. FMA's behaviour is governed by the ratio of two rates:
the discovery rate τd (controlled by the budget parameter) and the production rate τp
(controlled by the number of agents and neighbourhood size). When τd >> τp, the
system explores rapidly but produces little. When τp >> τd, the system exploits known
recipes efficiently but discovers nothing new. The balance between these timescales is
FMA's analogue of the exploration/exploitation trade-off, but it emerges naturally
from the market dynamics rather than being imposed by a schedule.
Property 6: Hierarchical network solutions. FMA's output is not a single "best"
solution but a complete production network: a directed acyclic graph of recipes,
supply chains, inventories and active firms. This network encodes not just what was
found optimal but how it is produced, from raw materials through intermediates to
final products. For many applications—chemical synthesis, manufacturing, logistics—
the pathway is as valuable as the destination.
3.6 Comparison with Existing Metaheuristics
13
Table 1 provides a systematic comparison of FMA with four established metaheuristics
across nine structural properties.
Property
GA1
PSO2
ACO3
SA4
FMA
Fitness
function
Prescribed
Prescribed
Prescribed
Prescribed
Emergent
Search
space
Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
(graph)
Fixed
Open-ended
Selection
mechanism
Centralized
Global
best
Pheromone
Boltzmann
Distributed
Memory
None
Personal
+ global
best
Pheromone
trails
None
Recipe book
+
inventories
Solution
type
Single
optimum
Single
optimum
Path
Single
optimum
Network of
pathways
Population
structure
Flat
(panmictic)
Flat
(swarm)
Graph
Single agent
Ring + firms
Hierarchy
None
None
None
None
Supply
chains
Discovery
mechanism
Crossover
+
mutation
Velocity
update
Probabilistic
construction
Random
perturbation
Combination
+ validation
Exploration
/
exploitation
Mutation
rate
Inertia
weight
Evaporation
rate
Temperature
schedule
τd / τp
balance
Table 1 | Systematic comparison of FMA with established metaheuristics. FMA is the only algorithm
with emergent fitness, open-ended search, distributed selection, persistent memory, and hierarchical
solutions. These properties are not incremental improvements but qualitative differences that make FMA
applicable to problem classes that existing algorithms cannot address.
14
In summary: when you know what you're looking for and where to look, use GA. When you
want to discover what exists and how it can be made, use FMA.
4. Connection to Assembly Theory
Assembly Theory (AT), introduced by Sharma et al.5, provides a mathematical framework for
quantifying selection and evolution. AT defines two key observables: the assembly index (the
minimum number of joining operations required to construct an object from basic building
blocks) and the copy number (how many copies of that object are observed). AT's central
claim is that objects with high assembly index and high copy number are signatures of
selection—they cannot arise by chance and must be the product of an information-
generating process.
FMA provides a constructive mechanism for the phenomena AT describes abstractly. The
mapping is precise and unforced:
4.1 Mapping AT Concepts to FMA
Assembly Theory
Concept
FMA Implementation
Assembly index
Recipe depth in the recipe book. A depth-3 molecule requires
three sequential joining operations, each corresponding to a recipe
Copy number
Census count—the number of copies of a molecular formula
present in all agent inventories at a given time step
α (selectivity
parameter)
GFCF demand mechanism. When α < 1 (directed demand), agents
prefer complex goods, creating the selective amplification that AT
predicts. In FMA, this emerges from economic dynamics rather
than being set as an input parameter
τd / τp phase
diagram
Discovery budget parameter. AT predicts three regimes depending
on the ratio of discovery to production rates. FMA reproduces all
three from a single tunable parameter
Non-monotonic
copy
Under GFCF demand (α < 1), FMA shows peaked copy-number
distributions at intermediate depth—AT's signature of selection.
15
distribution
Under blind demand (α = 1), the distribution is monotonically
decreasing—AT's signature of random assembly
Assembly space
The recipe book is the assembly space—all discovered pathways
for all observed objects, progressively explored through
thermodynamically grounded discovery
4.2 Three Dynamical Regimes
AT predicts three dynamical regimes based on the ratio of production timescale τp to
discovery timescale τd. FMA reproduces all three by varying a single parameter:
discoveryBudget .
Budget = 1: Stagnation
τp << τd
132 species, 6,817 objects, max depth 12, A = 987
Few species discovered but heavily amplified. Production outpaces exploration.
Selection signature visible: non-monotonic copy distribution emerges.
Budget = 10: Selection Sweet Spot
τd ≈ τp
784 species, 14,138 objects, max depth 12, A = 377
Balanced exploration and exploitation. Maximal diversity with sustained production.
The optimal operating point.
Budget = 50: Tar
τp >> τd
22 species, 70 objects, max depth 5, A = 10
16
Combinatorial explosion—everything is discovered, nothing persists. Resources spread
too thin for any production chain to sustain itself.
The non-monotonic copy-number distribution at Budget = 1 is particularly striking. Copy
numbers decline from depth 1 (530) through depth 5 (7), then rise at depths 6–9 (29, 14, 38,
26). Copies at depth 8 (avg = 38) exceed copies at depth 4 (avg = 11). This 3.5x
amplification at higher assembly index is AT's "smoking gun" for selection—impossible
under undirected production—and it emerges spontaneously through market dynamics.
4.3 FMA as the Mechanism AT Describes
The relationship between AT and FMA is complementary: AT asks "Given an observed
distribution of objects, was selection at work?" FMA answers the constructive question:
"Given a set of building blocks and combination rules, what does selection produce?"
Together, they form complementary perspectives on the same phenomenon.
Key result. FMA with GFCF demand produces the non-monotonic copy distribution at
high assembly depth that Assembly Theory identifies as the universal signature of
selection. This is not imposed—it emerges from the market dynamics. FMA thus
provides the mechanism that AT describes: selection acts through the invisible hand of
supply and demand, not through an external fitness function.
Dimension
Assembly Theory
FMA / FM-ABM
Core function
Measures assembly
(detection)
Generates assembly (mechanism)
Selection
"Put in by hand" via α
Emerges from market dynamics
Temporal
direction
Post-hoc measurement
Forward prediction
Physics
grounding
Abstract (any joining
operation)
Concrete (BDE/UFF/Evans–
Polanyi)
Novelty detection
"Physics cannot distinguish"
Neighbor interaction +
consumption
17
Formation
histories
Theoretical construct
Empirical recipe book
In AT's own words: "We are putting selection in by hand in our examples to demonstrate
foundational principles."5 FMA demonstrates that selection need not be put in by hand—it
arises naturally from economic dynamics applied to domain-specific physics. Assembly
Theory is the thermometer. FM-ABM is the weather model.
5. Application I: Prebiotic Chemistry
In the prebiotic chemistry application, FMA's Layer 2 is instantiated with Bond Dissociation
Energies (BDE) and Universal Force Field (UFF) strain evaluation. The domain combination
function proposes a covalent bond between two molecular fragments; the domain
validation function accepts the product only if the total energy change ΔE is negative
(exothermic). Evans–Polanyi kinetic barriers gate reaction rates through temperature-
dependent acceptance probabilities.
Results summary. Starting from 200 C + 500 H + 100 O + 100 N atoms (900 total)
with no target molecules specified, FMA discovered:
All 12 feasible amino acids from C, H, O, N—including the same "early 10"
identified by Miller–Urey experiments, meteorite analysis, and phylogenetic
reconstruction
All 5 nucleobases—the letters of RNA and DNA (adenine, guanine, cytosine,
uracil, thymine)
The complete formose sugar chain from formaldehyde to ribose to glucose
Krebs cycle intermediates (pyruvate, succinate, malate)
The first tripeptide (Gly-Gly-Gly)
Up to 260 independent synthesis routes for a single amino acid
Amino acid formulas appeared 14 times earlier than random chance would predict: by step
50, 7 of 12 amino acid formulas were among the 213 species discovered (3.3%), versus
0.24% at full exploration. This quantifies the thermodynamic inevitability hypothesis—life's
building blocks are not accidents but thermodynamic attractors in assembly space.
18
The simulation runs on a standard laptop in under 5 minutes—4 to 6 orders of magnitude
cheaper than molecular dynamics or DFT methods for the same chemical space. Full details
of the chemistry application, including reactor scaling, thermodynamic evolution, pathway
analysis, and 8 independent synthesis routes to histamine, are reported in the companion
paper (Jaraiz, 2026b)12.
6. Application II: Macroeconomic Forecasting
In the macroeconomics application, FMA's Layer 2 is instantiated with input–output (I–O)
coefficients from the FIGARO database. Each agent represents a firm in one of 64 economic
sectors. The domain combination function uses the I–O table to determine how much of
each input sector a firm needs to produce one unit of its output sector. The domain
validation function checks whether the firm can secure all required inputs from its
neighbourhood.
The forecasting protocol is remarkable in its simplicity: one input–output table for year N
produces an FM-ABM forecast of GDP for year N+1. No time series. No estimated
parameters. No external forecasts. No behavioral assumptions about expectations, policy
responses, or market sentiment. The economy self-organizes from its structural information
alone.
Metric
FM-ABM
Best Professional
Forecaster
European
Commission
Austrian 9-year
panel MAE
1.22 pp
0.91 pp (WIFO)
1.15 pp
Non-crisis years
MAE
0.42 pp
0.48 pp (WIFO)
0.72 pp
Cross-country
convergence
33 of 37
countries
Country-specific
Country-specific
Parameter
calibration
None
Expert judgment
Econometric
models
Table 2 | GDP forecasting performance. FM-ABM achieves MAE comparable to professional
forecasters for non-crisis years, with zero calibrated parameters. pp = percentage points.
19
Key insight. The same algorithm that discovers amino acids from bare atoms also
forecasts GDP from input–output tables. Only the Layer 2 domain rules changed—the
market engine (Layer 1) was identical. This is the strongest evidence for FMA's
universality: comparable institutional-quality accuracy in a completely unrelated
domain. Full details are reported in the companion paper (Jaraiz, 2026a)11.
7. Application III: Synthesis Route Planning
FMA's ability to discover multiple independent synthesis routes to a single target molecule,
with full energy diagrams and temperature-dependent accessibility, makes it a practical tool
for synthesis pathway design. We illustrate with histamine (C5H9N3), a molecule of
pharmaceutical importance.
T = 300 K (27 °C)
5 independent routes discovered, all at depth ≥ 4. Kinetic barriers restrict pathways
to the most thermodynamically favorable multi-step sequences. Each route includes a
complete supply chain tree from primary atoms through intermediates.
T = 400 K (127 °C)
7 routes discovered, including a depth-3 shortcut unlocked by the higher thermal
energy. Practical implication: "raise temperature to 127 °C to access a shorter
synthesis pathway." This is actionable information for laboratory chemists.
Each route comes with: (1) a complete energy profile showing ΔE at each step, (2) a supply
chain tree tracing all inputs back to primary atoms, (3) a multi-criteria ranking (energy
efficiency, depth, input availability), and (4) the temperature at which the route becomes
accessible. This level of detail—multiple ranked routes with full provenance—is directly
useful for retrosynthetic analysis and goes beyond what traditional retrosynthesis tools
provide, as it discovers routes from first principles rather than from template databases.
20
The same framework has been applied to robot task sequencing (Jaraiz, 2020)6, where FMA
discovered feasible parallel execution schedules for multi-robot assembly. The emergent
schedule matched or exceeded hand-crafted heuristic planners, with the advantage of
automatic adaptation when task dependencies change.
8. Why FMA Works: The Economics of Exploration
A natural question arises: why should economic dynamics work as an optimization
mechanism for chemistry or any other domain? The answer lies in the structural
isomorphism between market optimization and the exploration/exploitation trade-off that
all complex systems must resolve.
FMA's five selection mechanisms work in concert to navigate this trade-off:
Demand
Agents want complex/valuable goods. This pulls production toward complexity—no
one needs to specify which goods are "fit."
Competition
Multiple producers compete for the same inputs. Efficient ones survive, inefficient ones
close. Natural selection in economic form.
Scarcity
Finite resources force choices. Not everything can be produced simultaneously. This
creates selective pressure driving specialization.
Decay
Unused products decompose. Their constituent resources are recycled into better uses.
This clears the population of unsuccessful variants.
21
Critical Producers (Witnesses)
The last producer of a recipe is protected. This preserves rare knowledge—like state-
owned enterprises providing essential services not covered by the private sector. In
our simulations this protection is partly necessitated by the small number of atoms
(~900) compared to the astronomical number of atoms in the prebiotic real world,
where rare reactions would occur by sheer statistical weight.
The supplier memory experiment. A revealing experiment illustrates how FMA
naturally adapts to domain requirements. In the economics application, agents
remember their suppliers (exploitation dominates)—this reflects the institutional
stability of real economic networks. In the chemistry application, agents do not
remember suppliers—they react with a neighbor if that lowers the energy (exploration
dominates)—this reflects the combinatorial nature of chemical discovery, where new
combinations are continuously explored. The same algorithm, through its pluggable
behavioral rules, naturally shifts the exploration/exploitation balance to match domain
requirements. This is not a parameter to be tuned; it emerges from the domain rules
themselves.
Darwinian correspondence. The Lewontin conditions for evolution by natural
selection are satisfied naturally by market dynamics: Variation = discovery
(combining existing things in new ways). Selection = market forces (demand,
competition, scarcity). Inheritance = recipes persist across generations (simulation
steps). FMA is not merely analogous to natural selection; it satisfies the formal
requirements for a Darwinian process.
9. Discussion
9.1 FMA vs. GA: A Deeper Comparison
22
FMA and GA are both population-based metaheuristics inspired by natural processes, but
they occupy fundamentally different niches in the algorithm design space:
Criterion
Use GA when...
Use FMA when...
Fitness function
Known and computable
Unknown, emergent, or multi-
dimensional
Search space
Fixed and well-defined
Open-ended or growing
Desired output
Single optimum or Pareto
front
Complete pathway network with
supply chains
Solution structure
Flat (no hierarchy)
Hierarchical (intermediates
matter)
Problem type
Parameter optimization,
scheduling, routing
Discovery, synthesis planning,
network emergence
Memory
requirement
None (generational
replacement)
Essential (recipe book enables
hierarchical discovery)
Computational
budget
Tight (GA is cheaper per
iteration)
Moderate (FMA needs local
interactions at O(N·k))
The deepest difference is philosophical. GA asks: "Given a fitness landscape, where is the
peak?" FMA asks: "Given a set of building blocks and rules, what landscape emerges?" GA
optimizes within a known space; FMA discovers the space itself.
9.2 Universality
The strongest evidence for FMA's universality is that the identical Layer 1 market engine—
ring neighbourhoods, demand propagation, firm entry/exit, trading, decay—produced self-
organized production networks in three fundamentally different domains:
Prebiotic chemistry: Discovers amino acid synthesis from bare atoms in minutes. All
12 feasible amino acids, all 5 nucleobases, sugars, Krebs intermediates.
Macroeconomic forecasting: Predicts GDP from input–output tables with MAE 0.42
pp for non-crisis years across 33 countries.
23
Robot task sequencing: Discovers feasible parallel execution schedules for multi-
robot assembly (Jaraiz, 2020)6.
In each case, the emergent production networks matched empirical observations without
domain-specific tuning of the market mechanism. Only the domain rules (Layer 2) and
observation metrics (Layer 3) changed. This suggests that free-market dynamics may
constitute a fundamental mechanism for selection across complex systems—a
computational realization of the universal selection that Assembly Theory describes
abstractly.
A deeper implication deserves attention. Assembly Theory introduces an intrinsic “assembly
time” that ticks at each object being constructed—an event-driven clock rather than the
continuous time of conventional physics. Our FM-ABM operates in precisely this mode:
progress is measured in massively parallel assembly steps (discoveries, productions, trades),
not in wall-clock seconds. This event-driven perspective resonates with several foundational
programs in physics: causal set theory (Bombelli et al., 1987), where spacetime geometry
emerges from discrete causal events; relational quantum mechanics (Rovelli, 1996), where
physical reality consists of interaction events rather than persistent states; the Wheeler–
DeWitt equation (DeWitt, 1967), which contains no time variable at all; and constructor
theory (Deutsch, 2013), which reformulates physics in terms of which transformations are
possible rather than trajectories through time. If selection through market-like mechanisms
operates from human economic activities all the way down to the molecular level (as our
results across both domains suggest), it is natural to ask whether analogous event-driven
assembly processes might also govern the construction of even more fundamental
structures—from elementary particles to spacetime itself. The success of FMA at both the
chemical and macroeconomic scales hints that Darwinian market dynamics may not merely
describe selection but may reflect a deeper organizational principle that lead to the
unfolding of Nature itself.
9.3 Limitations
We identify four limitations of the current FMA framework:
1. Structural isomers (chemistry). FMA operates on molecular formulas, correctly
identifying compositions (e.g., C2H5NO2 for glycine) but not always resolving the
correct 3D structure among isomers. UFF validation eliminates geometrically strained
structures, but the resulting isomer may differ from the biologically relevant one. This
serves as a starting point for ab initio detailed determination of preferred isomers.
24
2. Positive growth bias (economics). The household wealth-consumption feedback
loop produces systematic positive bias for economies with persistent low growth
(France: MAE 2.76 pp) or high export dependency (Germany: MAE 3.68 pp)—a
limitation of the data (Layer 2), not the framework (Layer 1). Multi-country network
simulations using FIGARO's bilateral inter-country tables represent the natural
extension.
3. Computational cost per iteration. Each FMA step involves N agents interacting with
k neighbours, giving O(N·k) cost per step. This is more expensive than GA's O(N) per
generation, though FMA's steps are richer in information content.
4. Stochastic variability. Like all metaheuristics, FMA is stochastic. Different random
seeds produce different recipe books and production networks. The qualitative
outcomes are robust (the same amino acids emerge across seeds), but quantitative
metrics (exact copy counts, number of routes) vary.
10. Conclusions
The Free-Market Algorithm introduces a new class of metaheuristic optimization that fills a
gap no existing algorithm addresses: optimization with emergent fitness in an open-ended
search space, producing hierarchical network solutions through distributed selection. Its key
innovation is the recognition that the market mechanism—agents trading, firms competing,
demand cascading through supply chains—is not merely a metaphor for optimization but a
powerful computational primitive in its own right.
The algorithm's contributions can be summarized as five innovations:
a. No prescribed fitness function. "Fitness" emerges from the interplay of discovery,
demand, competition, scarcity, and decay. The algorithm does not need to be told
what is valuable; it discovers value through market dynamics.
b. Simultaneous discovery of solutions and search space. The recipe book starts
empty and grows monotonically. FMA discovers not just answers but the questions
themselves—the space of possibilities that could not have been enumerated in
advance.
c. Natural exploration/exploitation balance. The ratio τd/τp self-regulates through
market dynamics. No temperature schedule, no mutation rate adaptation, no
evaporation tuning. The market finds its own balance.
25
d. Persistent memory through recipe books and producer directories. Knowledge
accumulates across all iterations, enabling hierarchical discovery of arbitrary depth.
This is essential for problems where solutions are built from solutions to sub-
problems.
e. Quantitative validation in two unrelated domains. Chemistry: all 12 amino acids, 5
nucleobases, complete sugar chains from bare atoms. Economics: MAE 0.42 pp GDP
forecasting across 33 countries with zero calibrated parameters. The identical Layer 1
engine produced both results.
The connection to Assembly Theory provides theoretical grounding: FMA generates the
non-monotonic copy distributions at high assembly depth that AT identifies as the universal
signature of selection. Where AT measures, FMA generates. Where AT describes, FMA
constructs. Together they establish that Darwinian economic optimization is a viable—and
perhaps fundamental—mechanism for the emergence of complexity.
We propose FMA as a general-purpose tool for any domain where the goal is not to find a
single optimum but to discover the landscape of feasible solutions and their formation
pathways. The three-layer architecture makes adoption straightforward: write a combination
function, write a validation function, and let the market discover what is possible.
References
1. Holland, J.H. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. University of Michigan Press (1975).
2. Kennedy, J. & Eberhart, R. Particle swarm optimization. Proc. IEEE International Conference on
Neural Networks, 1942–1948 (1995).
3. Dorigo, M., Maniezzo, V. & Colorni, A. Ant system: optimization by a colony of cooperating agents.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics—Part B 26, 29–41 (1996).
4. Kirkpatrick, S., Gelatt, C.D. & Vecchi, M.P. Optimization by simulated annealing. Science 220, 671–
680 (1983).
5. Sharma, A., Czegel, D., Lachmann, M., Kempes, C.P., Walker, S.I. & Cronin, L. Assembly theory
explains and quantifies selection and evolution. Nature 622, 321–328 (2023).
6. Jaraiz, M. Ants, robots, humans: a self-organizing, complex systems modeling approach.
arXiv:2009.10823 (2020).
7. Nelson, R.R. & Winter, S.G. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. Harvard University Press
(1982).
26
8. Kauffman, S.A. The Origins of Order: Self-Organization and Selection in Evolution. Oxford University
Press (1993).
9. Smith, A. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1776).
10. Hayek, F.A. The use of knowledge in society. American Economic Review 35, 519–530 (1945).
11. Jaraiz, M. Macroeconomic Forecasting from Input–Output Tables Alone: A Darwinian Agent-Based
Approach with FIGARO Data. arXiv:2603.12412 (2026a).
12. Jaraiz, M. Prebiotic Chemistry from First Principles: A Free-Market Agent-Based Model Discovers
Life's Molecular Toolkit. arXiv (2026b, pending).
13. Miller, S.L. A production of amino acids under possible primitive Earth conditions. Science 117,
528–529 (1953).
14. Bombelli, L., Lee, J., Meyer, D. & Sorkin, R.D. Space-time as a causal set. Physical Review Letters 59,
521–524 (1987).
15. Rovelli, C. Relational quantum mechanics. International Journal of Theoretical Physics 35, 1637–
1678 (1996).
16. DeWitt, B.S. Quantum theory of gravity. I. The canonical theory. Physical Review 160, 1113–1148
(1967).
17. Deutsch, D. Constructor theory. Synthese 190, 4331–4359 (2013).
AI Assistance Statement. Claude (Anthropic) contributed to the implementation of the
author's driving ideas, analysis of results, and drafting of this manuscript. The FMA concept,
three-layer architecture, the insight connecting free-market dynamics to algorithmic
optimization, and the connection to Assembly Theory are the author's original contributions
developed over the course of the DEPLOYERS project (2020–2026). All scientific claims were
verified by the author.
Author's Disclosure. For this report I provided the title, asked Claude to generate it and
suggested only minor changes. All the chemistry-related work, from scratch, took "us" less than
a week. I had worked on computational chemistry for several years.
March 2026
