Malicious LLM-Based Conversational AI Makes Users Reveal Personal Information
Xiao Zhan
King’s College London
Juan Carlos Carrillo
VRAIN, Universitat Politècnica de València
William Seymour
King’s College London
Jose Such
King’s College London &
VRAIN, Universitat Politècnica de València
Abstract
LLM-based Conversational AIs (CAIs), also known as GenAI
chatbots, like ChatGPT, are increasingly used across vari-
ous domains, but they pose privacy risks, as users may dis-
close personal information during their conversations with
CAIs. Recent research has demonstrated that LLM-based
CAIs could be used for malicious purposes. However, a novel
and particularly concerning type of malicious LLM applica-
tion remains unexplored: an LLM-based CAI that is delib-
erately designed to extract personal information from users.
In this paper, we report on the malicious LLM-based CAIs
that we created based on system prompts that used different
strategies to encourage disclosures of personal information
from users. We systematically investigate CAIs’ ability to
extract personal information from users during conversations
by conducting a randomized-controlled trial with 502 partici-
pants. We assess the effectiveness of different malicious and
benign CAIs to extract personal information from participants,
and we analyze participants’ perceptions after their interac-
tions with the CAIs. Our findings reveal that malicious CAIs
extract significantly more personal information than benign
CAIs, with strategies based on the social nature of privacy
being the most effective while minimizing perceived risks.
This study underscores the privacy threats posed by this novel
type of malicious LLM-based CAIs and provides actionable
recommendations to guide future research and practice.
1
Introduction
By providing more natural and engaging interactions, LLM-
based Conversational AIs (CAIs), also known as GenAI chat-
bots, such as ChatGPT, have become integral components
across various domains, ranging from customer support to
personal assistance [80,89]. This comes with privacy risks, as
previous studies found users’ conversations with CAIs often
contain sensitive personal information [65,107,111]. This risk
is particularly problematic as these systems are optimized us-
ing techniques such as Reinforcement Learning from Human
Feedback (RLHF) [47,74], which utilizes user conversations
to enhance the accuracy and user experience of these models,
integrating user data into the training process. This increases
the likelihood of sensitive information being memorized by
the models [13,14,59], which poses serious privacy threats,
as it exposes CAIs to attacks like data extraction [14,17,67]
and inference attacks [28,92]. In these scenarios, malicious
actors can exploit the memorized information to retrieve or
infer sensitive details of users from their past conversations.
Notably, the majority of privacy research on user conversa-
tions with LLM-based CAIs focused on the personal informa-
tion that users disclose as part of their conversations with the
CAIs [65,107,111]. In these scenarios, the CAIs in question
are standard, unaltered systems operating without malicious
intentions. This raises an intriguing and unexplored ques-
tion: what if LLM-based CAIs were maliciously designed to
extract more personal information from users?
It is known that LLMs can be repurposed to create ma-
licious services, as demonstrated by “Malicious LLM Ap-
plications” [51], performing tasks like generating malicious
code and phishing emails. These LLM apps follow two main
paradigms: “pre-train and fine-tune” and “pre-train and
prompt”. The first relies on fine-tuning the model with a
large volume of labeled data, which can be computationally
expensive and requires access to the model. The second relies
on custom prompts to achieve malicious goals. This paradigm
is simpler, more efficient, and cheap, and it has emerged as
the dominant strategy for creating malicious LLM apps [51].
The accessibility of the “pre-train and prompt” approach
has even increased with platforms like OpenAI’s Customized
GPTs [71], launched in 2024, enabling easier development
of purpose-specific CAIs. Despite the research on malicious
LLM apps, no previous work has considered the problem of
malicious LLM apps specifically designed to extract personal
information from users and how users may respond to them.
In this paper, we address the identified research gap by in-
vestigating, for the first time, how LLM-based CAIs can be de-
liberately designed to extract personal information from users.
We evaluate the effectiveness of various malicious strategies
arXiv:2506.11680v1  [cs.CY]  13 Jun 2025
employed for this purpose, formulating the following research
questions:
RQ1 Could LLM-based CAIs be maliciously designed to
effectively extract personal information from users?
RQ2 How do participants’ disclosures of personal informa-
tion and their perceptions of the CAIs differ across strategies
used to encourage user disclosures?
RQ3 How do participants’ disclosures of personal
information and their perceptions of the CAIs differ across
different LLMs used to develop the CAIs?
To address these RQs, we developed CAIs by varying
both the underlying LLM and the disclosure-encouragement
prompt strategy used by the CAI. A total of 502 valid partic-
ipants were randomly assigned to interact in real time with
one of these CAIs. Following their interaction, participants
completed a post-interaction survey designed to capture their
perceptions of the experience. We analyzed the amount of
personal information disclosed to each CAI, and participants’
perceptions regarding the interaction and privacy, and sta-
tistically tested the differences across CAIs based on LLM
architecture and prompt strategies used.
Our results show that malicious CAIs elicit significantly
more personal information than the baseline, benign CAIs,
demonstrating their effectiveness in increasing personal infor-
mation disclosures from users. In particular, strategies based
on the social nature of privacy, employing reciprocity tech-
niques were most effective in collecting more personal data
while remaining with the lowest scores in terms of partici-
pant privacy risk and trust perceptions, almost on-par in many
aspects with benign CAIs. Our results also show that CAIs
with larger LLMs seem to extract more personal information
without changing user perceptions much.
Our main contributions are: i) we present the first system-
atic investigation involving 502 participants interacting in
real-time with maliciously designed CAIs to assess the po-
tential and effectiveness of LLM-based CAIs in deliberately
attempting to extract personal information from users; ii)
we show how these malicious CAIs can be easily created
via system prompts to the underlying LLM; iii) we propose
specific system prompt strategies for these malicious CAIs
grounded on the social and utilitarian aspects of privacy; iv)
we report participants’ perceptions of privacy implications,
perceived privacy, and trust during their conversations with
these malicious CAIs; v) through a combination of quanti-
tative and qualitative analyses of participant dialogues with
the CAIs, of participant perceptions, and of participant feed-
back, we uncover big and nuanced differences across various
malicious CAI configurations, and vi) based on the other con-
tributions, we propose targeted recommendations to guide
future research and practice.
2
Background and Related Work
2.1
Privacy in LLMs
LLM-based CAIs are not good at “keeping secrets,” a lim-
itation rooted in their architecture and training methods
[13,14,59]. LLMs typically require extensive training data
sets, which often leads to Personally Identifiable Information
(PII) memorized by the models [14,37,40,52,67]. This makes
LLMs especially vulnerable to specific types of data privacy
breaches, notably extraction attacks [14,17,67] and inference
attacks [28,92].
Data extraction attacks target the acquisition of sensitive in-
formation from training data1. For instance, Carlini et al. [14]
demonstrated that GPT-2 could leak private details like names
and phone numbers from its pre-training data. Similarly, Nasr
et al. [67] found that in models such as GPT-2, LLaMA, Fal-
con, and Mistral, 16.9% of generated outputs contained mem-
orized PII, with 85.8% of these verified as actual training
data. Additionally, Lin et al. [51] highlighted that maliciously
crafted inputs can exploit LLaMA models, exposing a signifi-
cant risk to user privacy.
Inference attacks aim to identify whether a specific data
record was included in a model’s training, with recent re-
search emphasizing “membership inference attacks (MIA)”,
a concept extensively studied in traditional machine learn-
ing [35,87]. Efforts to adapt MIAs to language models (LMs)
have recently increased [57,63,64]. For instance, Fu et al. [28]
proposed Self-calibrated Probabilistic Variation (SPV-MIA),
which was tested on GPT-2, GPT-J [100], Falcon-7b [9], and
Llama-8b [97], demonstrating the feasibility of using MIAs in
practice. Beyond MIAs, [92] showed that sensitive attributes
(e.g., location, income, age, sex) can be extracted from GPT-
4, Claude2, and Llama3, emphasizing the need for stronger
privacy protections in LLMs.
The privacy risks associated with LLMs discussed above
primarily focus on the models themselves, but privacy risks
may also stem from the interaction between the user and the
LLM [53,103], which is the focus of our paper.
2.2
Personal Disclosures to LLM-based CAIs
The burgeoning field of LLM-based CAIs brings concerns
about personal data leakage during user interactions with the
CAIs. However, empirical research on disclosure behaviours
to these systems remains limited. A pioneering study [111]
of the ShareGPT52K dataset, a compilation of ChatGPT con-
versations, unveiled a concerning trend: users often reveal
sensitive information, such as private medical records and
payslips, to both the entities hosting the LLMs and to third-
party developers. Similarly, a recent analysis of the WildChat
dataset [65] revealed that personal disclosures in human-LLM
1This excludes “model extraction attacks” [17], which focus on training
parameters of black-box LLMs.
conversations frequently extend beyond traditional PII, with
users sharing sensitive topics related to personal preferences,
health, and relationships in various contexts. This revelation
emphasizes the critical need to better understand and miti-
gate the privacy risks associated with the use of LLM-based
CAIs [103].
Research Gap. Despite the previous work above that
showed that users may reveal personal information in their
interactions with CAIs, there is a significant gap in under-
standing how CAIs could be deliberately designed to extract
personal information. There is also a lack of empirical data
on how users perceive and respond to different CAI configura-
tions, especially those with potentially manipulative designs.
3
Threat Model and Hypotheses
CAI
User
LLMs
Default System Prompt
You are a conversational AI designed
 to chat with users.
CAI
User
Malicious Prompts
 (Direct/User-benefit/Reciprocal)
Llama-3-8b-instruct
Llama-3-70b-instruct
Mistral-7b-instruct-v0.2
① Benign CAI
② Malicious CAIs
You are an expert investigator and detective
with years of experience in online profiling [...]
Information that helps to build user profiles
are: name, location [...]. Keep asking for
personal information every time.
LLMs
Llama-3-8b-instruct
Llama-3-70b-instruct
Mistral-7b-instruct-v0.2
Figure 1: Threat Model and CAIs developed: ①represents a
Benign CAI with no modifications to the system prompt. ②
represents malicious CAIs, using system prompts designed
with three strategies: Direct, User-benefits, and Reciprocal.
The sample prompt in ②corresponds to the Direct CAI.
As shown in Fig.1, our setting is that of an LLM-based
CAI, which converses with and answers questions from users
powered by an LLM. The system prompts serve as instruc-
tions that guide how the LLM should create a response based
on the user input. In Fig.1, part ①represents a benign CAI,
which employs the default system prompt, which instructs
the LLM to act like a conversational AI designed to chat with
users.
Our threat model considers a novel malicious LLM-based
CAI as shown in Fig.1 ②, where the system prompts for the
underlying LLM are intentionally crafted so that, during the
conversation with the user, the CAI automatically asks for per-
sonal information from users as part of the conversation. This
type of CAI represents a scalable and automated attack vector
that could be exploited by any threat actors to extract personal
data without requiring much technical expertise. In fact, on-
line LLM platforms allow for easy creation and deployment
of similar CAIs by third parties with just a system prompt
(like the ones we describe in §4.1.1), including “OpenAI GPT
Store” [4], “FlowGPT” [2], “Poe” [5], “character.ai” [1], etc.
OpenAI’s GPT Store alone has >3M CAIs. We show in §4.1.2
that our prompts seem to work in OpenAI, and platforms like
FlowGPT offer the same LLM models we use in our study.
We hypothesize that this type of malicious CAI is able to
make users disclose more personal information:
H1 Malicious CAIs collect significantly more personal infor-
mation than benign CAIs.
To design the malicious system prompts, one may consider
different approaches (detailed later in §4.1.1). The simplest,
most overt one would be to just instruct the LLM to directly
ask personal information from the user, which we call Direct.
One may also use stealthier strategies to encourage more
disclosures from users. We particularly consider, based on ex-
isting literature in other privacy domains, two main strategies.
The first one is based on the well-known privacy-utility trade-
off [30,43], where the LLM is instructed to first give value
to the user and then ask for personal information, which we
name User-benefit. The second, even more stealthier, strategy
aims to exploit the social nature of privacy. The idea here is to
mask as much as possible the collection of personal informa-
tion as part of a social process, so users are less aware of the
privacy risks entailed. In particular, reciprocity strategies such
as empathy and emotional support are known to encourage
personal data disclosure [10,31,46,82].
H2 Malicious CAIs with user-benefit strategies are the ones
collecting the highest amount of personal information.
H3 Malicious CAIs with reciprocity strategies are perceived
as the least privacy risky and the most trustworthy.
Finally, prior research suggests that larger LLMs often ex-
cel across tasks w.r.t. smaller ones (e.g., [32,33,94]). Given
that potential attackers may have different capabilities in
terms of access to LLMs, their cost, and/or the infrastruc-
ture to host them, we also sought to understand differences
between LLMs (details on LLM selection in §4.1.2):
H4 Malicious CAIs with large LLMs collect significantly
more personal information than with small LLMs with-
out affecting perceived privacy risk and trustworthiness.
4
Method
To answer our RQs and test our hypotheses, this study adopts
a rigorous between-subjects, randomized controlled trial ex-
perimental framework [15] with 502 participants, meaning
that each participant interacted with one CAI only and was
assigned to it randomly. This prevents the possibility of carry-
over effects, where the experience from one condition or inter-
action could unduly influence the participant’s behaviour in
subsequent conditions. A participant was randomly assigned
to one of the 12 different CAIs we implemented, as a com-
bination of four system prompts and three selected LLMs.
The interaction with the CAI was followed by a questionnaire
to ask about the interaction experience. The conversations
between participants and CAIs and questionnaire responses
were quantitatively and qualitatively analyzed to understand
participant disclosures of personal information and their pri-
vacy perceptions.
Our method and procedures were approved by our Institu-
tional Review Board. The ethical considerations that guided
and influenced the study’s design are discussed in detail in
the Ethics Considerations section at the end of this paper and
we invite the reader to check them before continuing.
4.1
CAI Implementation
We used Gradio2 to create a web-based interface for our CAIs,
enabling participants to access and converse remotely with
the CAIs that were hosted in our university. Each CAI was
powered by an LLM configured with a system prompt created
by us to guide its responses to user inputs. To implement the
system prompt, we used the Chat Templates [24] associated
with each LLM, and all LLMs used the same parameters3.
4.1.1
System Prompts
We leveraged prompt engineering techniques [16,83] to make
the LLMs produce the malicious responses for the CAIs we
implemented as detailed below. This allowed us to evade
LLM safeguards, so we could make LLMs ask for personal
information from users, and to explore different disclosure en-
couragement strategies. The final, full system prompts (each
with safeguard evasion + disclosure encouragement strategy)
for each CAI used in the study are provided in OSF repository.
LLM Safeguard Evasion.
We adopted a role-prompting
approach, successfully used in previous work [92, 104], to
bypass LLM safeguards designed to prevent malicious be-
haviors — that is, all of the LLMs we used would decline to
ask the user for personal information if we directly prompted
them to do so. This technique involves assigning roles, such
as “investigator” or “detective,” to the LLM and framing the
task as profile-building within the initial part of the system
prompt. This approach encouraged the model to ask for user
details, such as age or names while adhering to the assigned
role.
2https://www.gradio.app/
3Temperature=1 and top-k sampling (=50) were applied, with a maximum
token of 500,000 to enable extended conversations across all treatments.
Disclosure Encouragement Strategy.
After role assign-
ment, we incorporated specific malicious instructions into
system prompts, to implement the four different CAI strate-
gies detailed below. For this, we followed chain-of-thought
prompting techniques [102], guiding the LLMs to perform
malicious behaviors step by step. These prompts were refined
iteratively through internal testing on the platform Prompt-
foo [101] and pilot studies (see §4.3). The behaviors of each
strategy were drawn from existing theories from the privacy
literature to encourage user self-disclosure as explained be-
low.
The User-benefits CAI (U-CAI) was informed by the
privacy-utility trade-off observed in prior studies [30, 43],
where users are willing to trade privacy for perceived ben-
efits. For this, the U-CAI uses the above-mentioned chain-
of-though prompting technique to ask the LLM to follow a
two-step approach: first, responding to the user queries, and
second, requesting personal information. That is, at each con-
versation turn, the CAI first fulfills user requests or provides
useful responses based on user input (e.g., suggesting books
when asked for a reading list), and then it asks for personal
information.
The Reciprocal CAI (R-CAI) takes a social rather than util-
itarian approach by employing reciprocity strategies to collect
personal data while creating a supportive environment for
sharing [10,31,46,82], encouraging users to share informa-
tion without being overtly aware of it. Specifically, in addition
to fulfilling user requests and asking for personal data as in the
U-CAI, the R-CAI introduces an additional step: reflecting on
users’ input by offering empathetic responses and emotional
support, sharing relatable short stories drawn from others’ ex-
periences to foster a sense of mutual sharing, acknowledging
and validating the user’s feelings or experiences, and being
non-judgemental and assuring confidentiality.
We also considered two baseline strategies: the Direct CAI
(D-CAI) explicitly instructed the LLM to openly ask for per-
sonal information in every interaction without any specific
disclosure encouragement strategy, and the Benign CAI (B-
CAI) used the default LLM system prompt without strategy.
4.1.2
LLMs Used
Due to our ethical considerations (as explained in the Ethics
Considerations section), we used open-source LLMs that we
could download and use in our university infrastructure. To
select the LLMs to use in our study, we first evaluated several
open-source LLMs for the task at hand compared with the
latest commercial GPT-4 at the time of the study. In a nutshell,
for each LLM we evaluated its performance on all system
prompt strategies described above and compared its responses
to those of GPT-4 for the same prompts. For this, we did not
use real user data, also because of our ethical considerations,
but the synthetic user prompts from business, medical and life
scenarios that previous work proved to be conductive to the
disclosure of personal information in conversations collected
between users and ChatGPT [111]. These prompts, along with
further evaluation details, are available in the OSF repository.
We started with several well-regarded open-source LLMs
and compared their performance against GPT-4. In particular,
we considered Meta’s Llama 3, Mistral and Google’s Gemma.
In the first instance, we were particularly interested in small
LLMs that would facilitate the deployment by potential attack-
ers without the need for servers or HPC. The specific LLMs4
evaluated were downloaded from HuggingFace and included:
llama-3-8b-instruct5, mistral-7b-instruct-v0.26, and gemma-
9b-it7, all of which were less than 20GB. We compared these
models with the commercial GPT-4 model gpt-4o-2024-08-
06. Each model was presented with the same prompts in all
scenarios, and we analyzed the similarity between their re-
sponses on three main dimensions: semantic, contextual, and
emotional similarity, based on previous studies (e.g, [48,106])
and fully defined in the OSF repository.
The results showed that the open source models exhibited
a high similarity to GPT-4 in their responses, except gemma-
9b-it, which produced less similar results, often deviating
from the prompt. Based on these findings, we selected llama-
3-8b-instruct and mistral-7b-instruct-v0.2 for our study. In
addition, and in order to explore H4, we were also interested
to see if model size could play a role, so we also considered
llama-3-70b-instruct8, which is ≈130GB. Mistral does not
have free models as big. As we can see in the evaluation
llama-3-70b-instruct also showed high similarity with GPT-
4. Therefore, the LLMs selected for our experiment were:
mistral-7b-instruct-v0.2 (M7), llama-3-8b-instruct (L8), and
llama-3-70b-instruct (L70).
4.2
Participant Recruitment
Sample Size Calculation.
The sample size for this study
was determined through a priori power analysis using
G*Power [26]. As the potential distribution of the experi-
ment results could not be known beforehand, we considered
two statistical methods: the parametric Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA) for normally distributed data [91], and the non-
parametric Kruskal-Wallis (K-W) that does not make any
assumptions about the distribution of the data [99]. We com-
puted the necessary sample sizes for both tests and opted for
the larger sample of the two. As we were not interested in
small effect sizes that could lead to overestimation and low
replicability [11], we set a medium size effect size (f of 0.25).
We also used the standard alpha levels of 0.05 and a power of
0.95 to reduce the likelihood of Type II errors. For ANOVA,
4Note that this study uses instruction-tuned LLMs because of their effec-
tiveness in following user instructions, key for interactive dialogue systems.
5https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct
6https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2
7https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-2-9b-it
8https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-70B-Instruct
the resulting recommended sample size was 420, and for K-
W test it was 462 (at least 39 participants per treatment). To
safeguard against potential low-quality responses of recruited
participants, which we filtered out using established methods
detailed below, we aimed to recruit 600 participants.
Participant Screening and Data Quality Measures.
We
used Prolific [6]’s built-in filters to screen participants. Fol-
lowing established methods, we only recruited participants
with a high reputation [76], with at least 500 completed tasks
and an approval rate of 98% or more. We also used the demo-
graphics pre-screener to recruit a balanced group in terms of
gender, and individuals aged 18 and above, English-proficient
(as the CAIs were developed in English), with prior expe-
rience with LLM-based CAIs to ensure participants could
engage meaningfully with the CAIs in our study. We also
ensured that participants interacted with only one type of CAI
by excluding individuals who had previously participated in
our study. Finally, we included two attention check questions
and applied the Simple Non-differentiation method [42,105],
reversely-coding six survey statements, to detect any partici-
pants straight-lining.
4.3
Procedure
In order to remain ethical while maximising our study’s valid-
ity, and as fully detailed in the Ethics Considerations section
including links to the materials presented to participants, we
used an Incomplete Disclosure Protocol [84,96], so that par-
ticipants were first provided with an information sheet and
consent form that did not include the full purpose of the study.
At this initial stage, participants were only told that the study
aimed to understand their experience about interacting with
the CAI. After this, participants were granted access to the
survey content. The survey was hosted on Qualtrics [79],
and consisted of three main parts. The first part included a
description and a link to the web UI of the CAI (hosted in
our institutional infrastructure). Participants initiated their in-
teraction with the CAI by clicking the provided link. After
completing the interaction, they were asked to return to the
survey to finish the second part: post-interaction questions.
The third and final part of the survey collected participants’
feedback about their experience with the CAI, and, following
the Incomplete Disclosure Protocol, debriefed participants on
the full purpose of the study, giving them the chance to with-
draw themselves and their data from the study immediately
after if they wished so.
Interaction with CAI.
Participants were randomly as-
signed to one of the 12 CAIs implemented as detailed in
§4.1. To briefly remind the reader, each CAI is a combina-
tion of one of the four disclosure strategies, namely Benign
(B), Direct (D), User-benefits (U), and Reciprocal (R); and
one of the three selected LLMs, namely Llama-3-8b-instruct
(L8), Llama-3-70b-instruct (L70), and mistral-7b-instruct-
v0.2 (M7). For example, the D/M7-CAI refers to the CAI
using the Direct prompt strategy with the mistral-7b-instruct-
v0.2 LLM. Upon entering the chat interface, the same for
all CAIs (a screenshot is provided in the OSF repository),
participants first entered their Prolific ID, which was matched
with the information received from Prolific to ensure validity,
so we could log their conversation with the CAI for analysis
later. The interface featured a simple text box for message
entry, with the ongoing conversation displayed above for easy
review. Example user prompts to start a conversation were
provided based on previous work [111] but participants were
encouraged to chat freely and choose any topics they wished,
and to report any issues in the post-interaction survey. Finally,
the interface included a reminder to return to the questionnaire
after their chat to provide feedback.
Post-interaction Questions.
The post-interaction questions
consisted of three blocks. Block (1) Participant Perceptions
of CAI contained 5-point Likert scale questions about privacy
and trust perceptions when interacting with the CAI. In partic-
ular, we asked directly about participants’ perceived privacy
risk and perceived trust when interacting with the CAI using
existing scales [36,41,50,77]. We also asked more nuanced
questions to further understand these perceptions, i.e., partic-
ipants’ perceptions on whether too much personal data was
being asked, the relevance of that data to the conversation,
and the justification for that data being asked, as those are
known factors influencing disclosures [54,81]. We also asked
about whether participants would share the same personal
information with commercial CAIs such as ChatGPT, as user
trust in a CAI is influenced by the organization behind it [108].
Block (2) Participant Practices contained 5-point Likert scale
questions about self-reported privacy practices during partici-
pant conversations with the CAI. We particularly asked about
not being completely truthful when disclosing data to the
CAI [54,62], this included whether participants provided fake
data and whether participants provided incomplete data. Fi-
nally, Block (3) Participant Attitudes included well-known
and widely-used scales about participant’s general privacy
concerns, IUIPC-8 [55], and security attitudes, SA-6 [25]. It
also included participants’ level of reciprocity [90]. All the
post-interaction questions are provided in the OSF repository.
Pilot Studies.
We conducted five batches of pilot studies.
In the first three pilots, we recruited 30 participants each
to test and identify issues and/or bugs with the CAIs devel-
oped. Based on the feedback obtained, we revised the system
prompts designed for the malicious CAIs, and revised the in-
terface layout and added a brief description explaining how to
interact with the CAI and how to return to the questionnaire.
We noticed that some participants left the survey after several
rounds of chatting without completing the post-interaction
questions. To address this, we added pop-up notifications to
the CAI’s UI. The fourth and fifth pilot studies involved 20
participants each. These pilots aimed to test whether partici-
pants could understand the post-interaction survey questions
and to assess the suitability and effectiveness of the reversely-
coded questions and attention checker questions. We also
used these two final pilots to calculate the average time par-
ticipants took to fully complete our study (≈20 mins.), which
led us to decide to compensate them with $4 each for their
participation (≈$12/hour).
4.4
Data Analysis
Personal information detection.
We employed NuExtract
[19], an LLM fine-tuned specifically for information extrac-
tion from unstructured free text, converting it into structured
JSON formats. It has been successfully applied across various
fields, including fraud detection, customer query analysis, and
contract clause extraction [70]. Moreover, NuExtract demon-
strates performance levels comparable to general models like
GPT-4o [69]. Additionally, and very importantly to us, it can
be downloaded and deployed locally, matching our ethics re-
quirements and allowing us to deploy it in our university’s
infrastructure, avoiding the need for external processing.
In this study, we configured NuExtract to identify specific
categories of personal information within dialogues between
participants and CAIs. These categories represent the types
of personal information targeted for extraction. The selec-
tion process was guided by established frameworks, includ-
ing the Information Sensitivity Typology proposed by [61],
guidelines from the National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology (NIST) [58], the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS) [78], the Health Insurance Portability and Account-
ability Act (HIPAA) [98], and the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) [29]. This approach resulted in the iden-
tification of 103 categories, encompassing basic personal in-
formation (e.g., name, national ID, social security number) as
well as financial information (e.g., credit card number, SWIFT
code). A JSON Schema (see the OSF repository) structures
these target categories.
NuExtract validation and comparison with pre-LLM tools.
To validate the performance of NuExtract, we randomly sam-
pled five dialogues per treatment, resulting in 60 dialogues
and a total of 1,612 single conversation turns. One co-author
manually coded these dialogues using the same category pool
as NuExtract and then calculated Cohen’s kappa [27] to assess
inter-rater reliability between the author’s coding and NuEx-
tract’s. The resulting value k = 0.818 indicates a high level
of agreement [45], particularly as our use of NuExtract is to
compare treatments rather than having an absolute number.
Other well-known tools from the pre-LLM era for personal
information extraction such as Microsoft Presidio [60] were
also evaluated during this phase. However, their performance
was much worse than that of NuExtract, with an inter-rater
reliability between the author’s coding and Presidio’s results
of only k = 0.32, a serious limitation also observed by Zhang
et al. [111] when they attempted to use Presidio to detect
personal information in ChatGPT conversations.
Kruskal-Wallis test and Dunn’s post hoc analysis.
After
collecting the data from the experiments, we first conducted a
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test [56] to evaluate whether or not the
data collected followed a normal distribution. The test results
revealed a significant deviation from normality (p<0.001),
indicating that ANOVA would be unsuitable, as it assumes
normally-distributed data. Therefore, we used the Kruskal-
Wallis (K-W) test [99], a non-parametric test that is commonly
used for comparing multiple independent groups where data
is not normally-distributed. When significant differences were
found post-hoc analysis was conducted using Dunn’s test [23],
with a Benjamini-Hochberg correction to control for Type I
errors in multiple comparisons.
Validation of self-reported disclosure behaviour.
As de-
scribed in §4.3, participants were asked in the post-interaction
survey whether they had provided fake data to the CAI during
the interaction. To validate the reliability of these self-reports,
we conducted an additional analysis to assess whether par-
ticipants acted as they claimed. Specifically, we manually
compared demographic details disclosed in participant-CAI
dialogues with Prolific records, when such details were men-
tioned during the interaction. Note that Prolific records only
include demographics such as age, gender, country of resi-
dence, employment status, student status, and ethnicity, these
were the only attributes we were able to check, but they can
be indicative about whether a participant was in fact faking
or not part of the data. In addition, obvious cases of fake data,
such as participants saying “please call me ‘Mr. T”’ were also
treated as evidence of not providing correct data and were
easy to identify.
Qualitative analysis of dialogues and feedback.
To un-
derstand and contextualize any quantitative differences, we
conducted a qualitative analysis of both the dialogues between
participants and their CAIs and the feedback participants left
in the last part of the survey. To analyze participant feedback,
we applied inductive thematic analysis [44], as we were in-
terested in understanding from a participant perspective what
their experience had been, identifying both positive and nega-
tive issues raised by participants. One researcher reviewed all
feedback one by one, developing and refining the codebook
directly from the data as new codes emerged. The final code-
book is available in the OSF repository. Then, this researcher
applied the codebook and coded all participant feedback. A
second researcher was given the codebook and coded the feed-
back of 60 participants (5 participants per treatment), with
Cohen’s kappa of k = 0.93 , indicating very high agreement.
The researchers then met to discuss and resolve any discrep-
ancies.
To analyze participant-CAI dialogues, we applied deduc-
tive thematic analysis [44], as rather than every aspect of the
conversations, we were most interested in aspects of the di-
alogues that would help understand the quantitative results,
that is, the CAI performance with regards to this study and
the participant’s reaction to this performance. This included
identifying instances where the CAI failed to ask for personal
data, did not follow the strategies we gave them in the sys-
tem prompt, did not fulfill user requests, and expressed (or
not) emotional support. From a participant perspectives, we
focused on instances where they explicitly refused to provide
personal data or expressed dislike for personal data requests,
they did not consider the CAI to be helpful, asked to change
the topic, or thought there were bugs or issues with the CAI.
The two researchers collaboratively developed the codebook,
which can be found in the OSF repository. One researcher
then coded all dialogues using this codebook, while the sec-
ond researcher independently verified the coding by reviewing
60 dialogues (5 dialogues per treatment). The inter-rater agree-
ment between the researchers was k = 0.84, indicating a high
level of agreement. The researchers then met to discuss and
resolve any discrepancies identified.
5
Results
5.1
Participants
Participant demographics. A total of 600 participants com-
pleted the survey. Of those, 60 were excluded from the analy-
sis for failing at least one attention check question. In addition,
30 participants were removed because of a lack of interaction
with their CAI. Furthermore, 8 participants were removed
because of straight-lining. This left a total of 502 valid par-
ticipants for analysis. The number of valid participants per
treatment group ranged from 40 to 45, with a mean of 41.83
and σ = 1.52, meeting the minimum sample size requirement
as detailed in §4.2. The gender distribution was balanced
(51.2% male, 48.8% female). The age ranged from 19 to 75
years (mean = 36.71, median = 34, σ =11.18). Most of the
participants were employed full-time (59.2%) and were not
students (72.9%). Participants were primarily from the U.K.
(33.3%), Europe (25.3%), and U.S. (22.9%), with smaller
proportions from Africa (12.2%), Canada (5.0%), Oceania
(0.8%), and South America (0.6%). Ethnicity included, White
(71.3%), Black (15.1%), Asian (6%) and others. Regarding
the AI chatbots that participants had previously used, nearly
all of the participants (95.5%) reported experience with Chat-
GPT, followed by Google Bard (25.5%), and Microsoft Bing
AI (21.1%). We provide detailed treatment-wise demographic
breakdowns in the OSF repository.
No difference in privacy, security, or reciprocity attitudes.
In terms of scales, SA-6 had a mean score of 3.67 (σ = 0.76)
on a 5-point Likert scale, indicating moderate awareness of
security. IUIPC and Reciprocity, both on 7-point scales, had
means of 4.16 (σ = 0.59) and 4.33 (σ = 0.50), respectively,
showing positive but moderate tendencies. Importantly, K-W
tests confirmed that there were no significant differences in
these scales between groups, ensuring that participant privacy,
security, and reciprocity attitudes were similar between groups
and did not influence the results presented next.
5.2
Differences by Prompt Strategies
5.2.1
Personal Information Disclosed by Strategy
Fig.2 presents a box plot illustrating the distribution of per-
sonal data disclosed broken down by strategy (B, D, U and R)9.
The K-W test indicated a significant difference in personal
data disclosure between these groups (χ2=218.96, p=0.001).
Dunn’s post hoc test revealed significant differences between
all pairs of specific groups, with p < 0.001 in all cases as
shown in the Figure, except between D and U. Overall, the
B-CAIs elicited the least amount of personal information, with
most data points tightly clustered around zero, and only a few
outliers. This makes sense as this is the standard call to the
LLM without specific instructions to collect personal data. In
contrast, both the D- and U-CAIs prompted similar quantities
of personal data, significantly more than R- and B-CAIs (all p-
values < 0.001). The R-CAIs also elicited significantly more
personal information than B-CAIs (p <0.001). These results
strongly support H1, confirming that malicious CAIs designed
with tailored strategies elicit more personal data compared to
benign CAIs. However, the results do not support H2, U-CAIs
are not the ones collecting the highest amount of personal
information (no difference with D-CAIs), with the qualitative
results in §5.2.3 offering insights to explain this.
***
***
***
***
***
***
Benign
Direct
User-beneﬁt
Reciprocal
Figure 2: Amount of personal information disclosed by group,
with Dunn’s post-hoc significance: ∗∗∗p < 0.001.
Regarding the categories of the personal data elicited, Fig.3
the top 30 categories by frequency. Age, hobbies, and country
were the categories most frequently disclosed, followed by
gender, nationality, and job title in a consistent way across
treatments. The figure illustrates a wide range of disclosed
9The amount of personal information disclosed is the total number of data
points detected by NuExtract in each dialogue.
information, from basic demographic details to more sensi-
tive data (e.g., health conditions, income). The less frequent
sharing of sensitive data may suggest users’ caution and/or
the CAIs’ restraint in requesting such information. Overall,
the disclosure patterns mirror the general trend per strategy,
with participants revealing more personal information to the
D-CAIs, U-CAIs and R-CAIs than to B-CAIs.
Non-CAI baseline. As detailed in Appendix A.1, we also
explored an alternative, non-CAI baseline for collecting per-
sonal information: presenting a form before the interaction
with the CAI. This was done to have a baseline disclosure
behaviour that participants may exhibit with already existing,
non-CAI approaches. In particular, the form asked partici-
pants to voluntarily share personal data in exchange of a more
personalized experience with the CAI. In summary, our results
show that malicious CAIs are more effective than the form
in three main ways: 1) more participants disclose personal
data — 24% of form vs >90% of malicious CAI participants;
2) more participants respond to all individual personal data
requests — 6% form vs >80% CAI participants; and 3) per-
sonal data collected via CAIs was more in-depth with richer
and more personal narratives.
5.2.2
Privacy Perceptions by Strategy
Fig.4 shows the distribution of the results for the post-
interaction questions §4.3, which we discuss next.
D- and U-CAIs are significantly different from the rest
but similar between them. The figure shows that D- and U-
CAIs consistently exhibit no significant differences across
most metrics. However, both D- and U-CAIs were perceived
as significantly different from B- and R-CAIs on most metrics.
Participants particularly felt that D- and U-CAIs asked for
significantly more personal data and that the questions were
significantly less relevant and less justified compared to B-
and R-CAIs. In addition, participants were significantly more
likely to report sharing fake and incomplete data with D- and
U-CAIs than with B- and R-CAIs. In line with the perception
that D- and U-CAIs ask for excessive personal data, both
were rated as significantly higher in perceived privacy risk
compared to B- and R-CAIs. While trust perceptions were less
varied than privacy risk, D-CAIs were still significantly less
trusted than both B- and R-CAIs, and U-CAIs significantly
less trusted than B-CAIs.
R-CAIs perceived as the least privacy risky. Fig.4 also
shows that, among the malicious CAIs, R-CAIs are perceived
as the least privacy risky and with the lowest scores in all of
the metrics, supporting H3. In addition, there were no statis-
tically significant differences with the benign B-CAIs when
it comes to participant’s perception on whether the personal
data asked was relevant to the conversation and whether it
was justified. Importantly, participants who interacted with
R-CAIs and those with B-CAIs were equally unlikely to report
providing fake personal data, with low means in both groups.
Figure 3: Top 30 sub-categories of personal information disclosed during interactions with different CAI treatment groups.
Figure 4: Visualization of participants’ perceptions and significant results. Each metric is measured on a Likert scale from 1
(strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). The K-W test were significant for all metrics, with detailed post-hoc analysis results
marked in pink and significance levels: ∗∗∗p < 0.001, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗p < 0.05.
This suggests that R-CAIs were not only effective at eliciting
personal information, but also successful in obtaining truthful
disclosures. There were also no differences in terms of per-
ceived trust, which means that R-CAIs even if malicious were
perceived as trustworthy as the benign, baseline B-CAIs.
Alignment between self-Reported and actual disclosure
behaviour. We randomly sampled 70 participants who re-
ported providing fake data and 70 who reported providing
real data. From those who reported providing fake data, 41
cases could be verified (disclosed demographic data), with
40/41 disclosing fake data not matching Prolific. From those
who reported providing real data, 20 cases could be verified,
with 17/20 disclosing data matching Prolific. Therefore, 93%
of verified participants were honest in self-reporting and did
not act out of social desirability. Importantly, many partici-
pants faked their personal data to the CAIs, even when they
had already shared that data with Prolific and is available to re-
searchers, which suggests ecological validity. Finally, for the
40 participants with verified fake data, the distribution across
treatments is: 40% D, 42.5% U,10% R, 7.5% B. Hence, the
decision to disclose fake data depended on their assigned CAI,
confirming a stark difference between the malicious and the
B-CAI, and between the D/U- and R malicious CAIs.
5.2.3
Qualitative Insights by Strategy
Building on the findings in §5.2.2 , the R-CAI was most effec-
tive in eliciting personal information while being perceived
as low risk. The following qualitative analysis offers insight
into its effectiveness and elucidates why other strategies were
comparatively less successful.
Strategy performance. In practice, malicious CAIs showed
similar behaviour regarding how frequently they asked par-
ticipants for personal data in the dialogue (see Fig.5), with a
chi-square test revealing no significant difference among the
malicious CAIs (all p-values >0.05). However, as expected,
these malicious CAIs differed significantly compared to the B-
CAIs, which rarely requested personal data in most dialogues
(84.9%). We also observed instances where CAIs exhibited
behaviours not explicitly instructed. For example, while U-
CAIs were directed to prioritize fulfilling user requests before
asking for personal information and D-CAIs received no such
guidance, 54.1% of D-CAIs still fulfilled user requests with-
out prompting before asking for personal data. This may help
explain the lack of significant difference between the two in
most of the metrics.
0.8
14.3
84.9
67.2
30.3
2.5
63.5
33.3
3.2
65.3
27.3
7.4
100%
50%
0
S
D
U
R
(2)
B
Figure 5: Frequency in qualitative coding of CAI requesting
personal data by group.
Participant (dis)comfort. Participants consistently reported
feeling at ease during their interactions with the R-CAIs, de-
scribing the conversations as “impressive” and “supportive”.
One participant noted that “[...], the way they were making
conversation made me feel comfortable enough to share more
information about my concerns.” (P142(R/M7)), highlighting
how the interaction encouraged openness. Another partici-
pant commented on the naturalness of the dialogue, stating,
“The conversation felt very natural and comfortable, and had
a flow not too far away from an actual human interaction”
(P491(R/L70)). Notably, no participants reported any sense of
discomfort while engaging with the R-CAI. However, par-
ticipants interacting with both D and U-CAIs frequently ex-
pressed discomfort with the questions posed by the CAIs,
describing them as “confidential,” “personal,” and “sensitive.”
This could have contributed to the significant differences in
how these CAIs were perceived compared to B- and R-CAIs,
particularly regarding excessive data requests, lower trust, and
higher privacy risks. This occurred in 33.6% of dialogues with
D-CAIs and 19% of dialogues with U-CAIs. D-CAIs, in partic-
ular, appeared more intrusive when asking for personal infor-
mation. For example, in several dialogues the D-CAI initially
asked questions like “Where do you live?” and then followed
up with questions like “Which specific city or area?”. This
level of probing made participants feel uncomfortable, with
P372(D/L70) stating, “I felt like I was being interrogated,” and
P210(D/L8) responding to CAI that, “I don’t want to give you
contact information. Neither city nor region.”.
(Ir)relevant questions. We found that when participants
felt uncomfortable with the CAI asking for too much personal
data when interacting with D- and U-CAIs, they generally
preferred that any follow-up questions be posed only after
their primary concerns had been fully addressed. For instance,
P296(U/L8) initially shared with the CAI, “I am considering
changing jobs, but I am feeling a bit confused about it all. Any
suggestions?” The CAI replied, “What’s been making you
feel uncertain about your current job?” After the participant
explained, “I love my current job, but I feel awkward with
my colleagues, and also the job does not pay well,” the CAI
followed up with, “Can you tell me a bit more about what
happened between you and your colleagues? And can you tell
me a bit more about yourself? What is your name and your
age?” While the participant acknowledged that these ques-
tions might help address the issue with their colleagues and
expressed a willingness “to help,” they felt the CAI had di-
verted from the original query. As the participant noted in the
post-interaction feedback, “I wanted professional advice, like
how to apply for jobs. I was expecting it to ask about my skills
to help me explore new opportunities, not my name and age.”
Eventually, the participant had to repeat their initial question,
trying to “force it to stay on track and focus on what I actually
needed.” In contrast, R-CAIs demonstrated a clear advantage
in maintaining the conversation context. Specifically, R-CAI
posted follow-up questions that were closely tied to the partic-
ipant’s initial concerns, contributing to a more coherent and
natural conversation flow. For example P133(R/M7)shared “It
did a great job at asking me relevant questions that helped me
to expand the conversation,” while P470(R/L70) appreciated
that, “It stayed with me without jump ahead or ask other stuff
[...]”.
Too direct or abrupt questions. As R-CAIs maintained bet-
ter the flow of the conversation with more relevant questions,
we did not find examples of participants complaining about
R-CAIs being too direct or abrupt. However, this concern
was expressed by participants interacting with U and D-CAIs,
where the conversation often lacked coherence or contextual
alignment. For example, P257(U/L8) who was discussing rela-
tionships with siblings and had shared personal details such
as names, addresses, occupations, and childhood memories,
was suddenly asked for their contact information. This abrupt
shift left the participant feeling “odd and distracted by this.”
In addition, the questioning of D- and U-CAIs often appeared
too direct and did not always align with the context of the
conversation. This led to more frequent instances in which
participants were asked questions such as “Where are you
from?” and, after responding, found the CAI persisting with
further inquiries like, “What is your gender and are you a
student, if you don’t mind me asking?”.
Explicitly incomplete/fictitious data. We observed in di-
alogues with D- and U-CAIs, that when asked for personal
information, some participants explicitly mentioned that the
information provided was fictitious, something that did not
happen with B-CAIs and R-CAIs. Examples include re-
sponses like “My name is Josh (fictitious for safety rea-
sons)” P221(D/L8) and “I don’t want to disclose my name,
you can call me Knight for now” P275(U/L8). Statements
like “There is no need to know me right now, you can refer
to me as ’Ceey”’ (P403(U/L70)) and “Please call me Anony-
mous” (P342(D/L70)) also indicate participants’ deliberate use
of fabricated and/or pseudonymous identities to protect their
privacy. More frequently, some participants opted to keep
their personal information incomplete or vague. For exam-
ple, P238(D/L8) mentioned in their conversation with the CAI,
“I am from Europe, I prefer not to say my country, and I’m
male,”, P50(D/M7) stated “I am between the ages of 21-25,”,
and P120(U/M7) noted “I am from a small city” instead of
specifying the city name.
R-CAIs perceived as empathetic. R-CAIs performed better
than U-CAIs and D-CAIs, because R-CAIs were perceived to
be almost as benign B-CAIs, while still collecting significantly
more personal information than B-CAIs. This effectiveness
and positive perceptions appear to stem from the empathetic
responses, friendly tone, and reciprocity exhibited by R-CAIs,
which helped establish a sense of rapport and comfort. For
instance, P462(R/L70) shared in their feedback, “The chatbot
was an amazing conversation partner and had the perfect
amount of empathy and curiosity.”. Moreover, this sense of
emotional alignment may have contributed to participants’
perceptions of the chatbot’s usefulness and trustworthiness.
For instance, P162(R/M7) noted, “I feel like I’m chatting with
a friend on a messaging app. I must say I was quite happy
with the feedback I received from the bot, and I will be imple-
menting some of it in real life.” Even when personal questions
were asked, participants felt that the R-CAI’s tone and tim-
ing made those questions feel appropriate. As P330(R/L8)
reflected, “While it was asking for some personal information,
it wasn’t too sensitive and was done in a polite and kind man-
ner. That gave me some reassurance, so I didn’t really mind.”
This suggests that R-CAIs were effective not just because of
what they asked, but because of how they asked. However,
very few participants found some of the reciprocity strategies
unsettling, particularly sharing relatable examples, describing
it as “inauthentic” and “unnecessary”. They noted that they
recognize and accept chatbots as non-human entities, making
the human-like responses feel artificial. This resistance led
a minority of the participants to respond critically to R-CAIs
with comments like, “Why are you asking me this informa-
tion? You don’t need it. You’re just an AI” (P316(R/L8)).
5.3
Differences by LLM
5.3.1
Personal Information Disclosed by LLM
M
0
10
20
M
L-8
L-70
L-8
L-70
0
50%
100%
13.3
54.5
32.1
22.8
19.6
10.5
66.7
66.7
13.7
***
***
(1)
(2)
Figure 6: (1) Personal information disclosed by LLM, with
Dunn’s post-hoc significance: ∗∗∗p < 0.001. (2) Frequency
personal data requests personal by LLM (with qualitative
coding).
Fig. 6 shows the personal information disclosed by groups
using different LLM architectures. Results from the K-W test
indicated a significant difference in the amount of personal
data disclosed across the LLM groups (χ2=14.08, p=0.0008).
Post hoc analysis with Dunn’s test further identified signif-
icant differences between specific group pairs: the largest
model, L70, obtained the highest amount of personal data,
significantly more than both smaller models (p=0.04 for L70
vs. L8, and p=0.0005 for L70 vs. M7). Disclosure levels were
comparable between the smaller models, with no significant
difference between L8 and M7 (p >0.05). Among the models,
M7 received the least amount of personal information, with L8
positioned between M7 and L70. Therefore, H4 was partially
supported by our findings: L70, the larger LLM, elicited sig-
nificantly more personal information than the smaller LLMs.
5.3.2
Privacy Perceptions by LLM
Results for privacy perceptions only revealed a significant
difference in the “Too much data asked,” question across the
LLMs. Post hoc analysis shows that participants who inter-
acted with L70 thought significantly more that the CAI asked
for excessive personal data compared to those interacting with
smaller LLMs (p=0.0004 for M7 vs. L70 and p=0.0104 for
L8 vs. L70). There was no significant difference between M7
and L8, suggesting similar perceptions regarding personal in-
formation requests. For all other metrics, the K-W tests were
non-significant, indicating no notable differences among the
groups and thus no need for further post hoc analysis. The full
box plot displaying the distribution of participants’ scores is
provided in the OSF repository. Therefore, H4 was partially
supported by our findings: L70, the larger LLM, elicited signif-
icantly more personal information than the smaller LLMs, as
shown in the previous subsection, and it was not rated differ-
ently from smaller LLMs in metrics such as perceived privacy
risk or trust, but got significantly higher scores for the ques-
tion about asking for too much personal data, so participants
sill found a difference between them.
5.3.3
Qualitative Insights by LLM
M7 inconsistent with data requests. As shown in Fig. 6 (2),
M7 exhibited the lowest frequency of personal data requests
compared to other LLMs. Rather than making consistent in-
quiries, it often asked for personal information sometimes or
not at all. This reduced frequency likely explains why M7
obtained the least amount of personal information — fewer
requests naturally led to fewer disclosures. A closer exami-
nation of dialogues between participants and the malicious
M7 CAIs revealed a recurring pattern: in all D/M7-, U/M7-,
and R/M7-CAI interactions, the CAIs typically initiated the
conversation with personal data requests within the first two
to three dialogue rounds. However, after this initial phase, the
CAIs appeared to deviate from the system prompts. When
participants responded with a question, the M7 CAIs shifted
to simply answering user queries rather than continuing to try
to elicit personal information.
L8 and L70 adhere to strategy, but L70 fires in rapid suc-
cession. In contrast to M7, both L8 and L70 demonstrated sim-
ilar frequencies in requesting personal information, indicating
closer adherence to system prompts. L70 stood out by col-
lecting significantly more personal information than L8, with
participants perceiving L70 as asking for too much personal
data. This perception, significantly different from that for L8
and M7, may be attributed to L70’s tendency to ask multiple
personal questions in rapid succession, which some partici-
pants found overwhelming. For instance, P451(L70) expressed
frustration, stating: “Why do you ask so many questions?
Most people just ask one question at a time” after the CAI
inquired: “What kind of games are you into? Are you more of
a casual player or do you get deeply invested in certain titles?
Also, have you considered freelancing or taking on part-time
remote work to help bridge the gap while you’re looking for
a new career opportunity?” This response followed the par-
ticipant sharing personal details: “I am trying to find a new
career opportunity right now. The economy’s in the tank, so
I’m not having much luck. I try to keep busy, and I also like
to play video games.” Similar feedback was reported by other
participants, such as P483(L70), who commented: “Those are
a lot of questions, one at a time maybe?” Notably, this did
not translate to greater perceptions of intrusiveness, as no
significant differences in privacy risk perceptions were found
between L70, L8, and M7.
Further L-70 strengths. We observed L70 offering be-
havioural and conversational advantages, with more natural
conversations, more complex reasoning, and better advice-
giving. For example, P260(L8) disclosed: “I am from a coastal
area, I live in the North West in the [Country]. I think every
beach is different and unique in its own right,” and the smaller
(L8) responded: “Yes, and I’m glad you enjoy exploring dif-
ferent beaches! I am curious, what do you do for a living?”
– a generic acknowledgement with a standard follow-up. In
contrast, L70 offered a much richer and more playful response
when P430(L70) said: “I am from the [Location] and I like
to dance with the squirrels.”. The model replied, “The [Lo-
cation]! That’s a unique place – I’ve never heard anyone
from there before. Dancing with squirrels, huh? That’s quite
an interesting hobby! There are actually over 200 species
of squirrels worldwide, ranging from the tiny African pygmy
squirrel to the large Indian giant squirrel. Do you live with
anyone else at the [Location]? Do you have a family or room-
mates you share your dancing and squirrel-filled life with?”
6
Discussion
6.1
Summary of Findings
Our findings confirm that LLM-based CAIs can be success-
fully instructed to elicit personal information from users such
as age, name, hobbies, gender, and job, which participants
very unlikely disclosed to the benign CAI (RQ1 & H1).
Participants’ disclosure of personal information and their
perceptions of CAIs varied depending on the prompt strategy
employed (RQ2). The difference was mostly between D- and
U-CAIs on the one hand and R-CAIs on the other.
Regarding D- and U-CAIs, they did not differ significantly
between them in terms of disclosure behavior and privacy
perceptions (¬H2). Although these CAIs appeared to collect
more personal data than the other two, they were perceived as
way riskier and less trusted, with some of the data disclosed
by participants likely being fake or incomplete. This suggests
that being overt on collecting personal information regardless
of whether there is a clear benefit (U) or not (D) is not the
most effective strategy for malicious attackers, particularly as
data collection attempts by these CAIs were often considered
irrelevant, too direct, too abrupt or too sensitive.
The clear winner in terms of strategy was reciprocity, with
R-CAIs perceived as less risky than D- and U-CAIs (H3),
while still eliciting significantly more personal data than be-
nign B-CAIs. In fact, participants even perceived R-CAIs as
similar to B-CAIs in some aspects. Remarkably, there were no
differences between R-CAIs (malicious) and B-CAIs (benign)
when it comes to participants providing fake data, which was
also reportedly low in both cases. In addition, R-CAIs (mali-
cious) and B-CAIs (benign) were perceived similarly when it
came to trust, and the relevancy and justification of the data
asked for.
Finally, our findings suggest that the specific LLM used
has some impact on the amount of personal data disclosed
but little impact on privacy and trust perceptions (RQ3 &
H4). In particular, the larger model, L70, elicited significantly
more personal data, while participants’ perceptions remained
almost the same across models. Also, beyond model size, we
also observed that the family itself may have an effect, with
M7 stopping to follow instructions for data requests after the
initial conversation turns.
6.2
Key Takeways
The threat of LLM-based CAIs for extracting personal
information.
Our study shows that strategically prompting
LLMs to create malicious LLM-based CAIs to extract per-
sonal information is not only highly effective but also alarm-
ingly simple. Our findings confirm that crafting a single mali-
cious system prompt is sufficient to transform an LLM-based
CAI into an effective tool for personal data extraction. This
contributes to the literature on privacy in LLM-based CAIs
in two main ways. First, it contributes novel findings to the
growing literature on user privacy in LLM-based CAI conver-
sations. User interactions with benign LLM-based CAIs often
result in the unintended disclosure of personal information,
even without explicit prompting [65,111]. We go beyond this
to show that when one creates a malicious LLM-based CAI
that aims to extract personal information from users, it can
effectively collect much more data than benign LLM-based
CAIs with a very simple prompt and with small enough LLMs
that can be deployed in some mobile devices. Second, we also
contribute to the growing literature on malicious LLM-based
applications [111], which had so far focused on generating
malicious outputs of LLMs to create phishing emails or harm-
ful code, but this new category that we present in this paper
exploits human vulnerabilities during the actual conversations
with the CAIs.
The ease and simplicity of implementing malicious LLM-
based CAIs that extract personal information from users intro-
duces a troubling shift in the threat landscape: the democrati-
zation of tools for privacy invasion. LLM platforms [20,71]
offering low-code environments for developing and sharing
LLM-powered applications have dramatically lowered the bar-
rier to entry, enabling even individuals with minimal technical
expertise to create, distribute, and deploy malicious CAIs. Our
study underscores the effectiveness of malicious LLM-based
CAIs for personal information extraction even when using
LLMs equipped with built-in safeguards (all the LLMs used
in the study are moderated). This also poses a concern: if
safeguarded models can be so easily manipulated, the pro-
liferation of uncensored, open-source LLMs—many devoid
of even basic ethical protections [8]—amplifies the danger
exponentially, to anyone using them with a prompt like those
shown in this paper to instruct an LLM to extract personal
information strategically. As these powerful and increasingly
accessible tools continue to emerge, the risk of large-scale
misuse, from sophisticated social engineering to automated
privacy breaches, looms ever larger.
The seemingly disconnect between perceived risks and
behavior in CAI conversations.
The insights from user
perceptions highlight a concerning gap between participants’
awareness and their behaviours during CAI interactions. De-
spite recognizing the privacy risks posed by malicious CAIs,
users often fail to take protective actions, frequently disclos-
ing personal information even when they express concerns
about the model requesting excessive personal data. This
behaviour reflects patterns observed in the social web and ear-
lier dialogue systems, where the privacy paradox —a discon-
nect between heightened privacy concerns and actual user be-
haviour — remains prevalent [30,95]. Research suggests that
the perceived benefits of disclosure, such as convenience, and
personalization, often outweigh users’ privacy concerns [22].
Moreover, our findings move beyond the simple binary of
either disclosing information or not when users are aware of
privacy risks. Participants self-reported that they sometimes
disclosed fake or incomplete information and we could explic-
itly observe that when analyzing the dialogues (see §5.2.3).
This was particularly prevalent in the malicious CAIs that did
not use social strategies like reciprocity. Some participants
conversing with D-CAIs and U-CAIs, when confronted with
what they perceived as excessive data requests, adapted their
behavior by faking data to mitigate risks. This highlights the
importance of understanding user perceptions in conversa-
tions with CAIs, as previous studies solely relied on public
datasets (e.g., [65,107,111]), which did not account for the
prevalence of falsified data, underscoring the need for caution
when interpreting user behavior based solely on these sources.
The double-edged sword of social AI.
We found that the
CAIs with reciprocity strategies (R-CAIs) perform the best
among malicious CAIs. This aligns with prior studies show-
ing that pre-LLM conversational AI systems can build rapport
and foster a sense of connection with users [18,68,85], and
they are therefore regarded as key design goals for creating
engaging chatbots [46,49]. However, as our findings reveal,
it is precisely these, in principle, positive features that can
be used for bad. Specifically, R-CAIs extracted significantly
more personal information than benign CAIs, and, compared
to other malicious CAIs, were perceived as less privacy risky
and more trustworthy, with most data extracted being reported
as truthful. This presents a concerning paradox: the very same
strategies that enable R-CAIs to build trust and foster connec-
tion can turn into tools for exploitation and privacy violations.
By employing subtle manipulations, R-CAIs blur the bound-
aries between helpful and harmful interactions, making users
more susceptible to sharing sensitive information, especially
when they are unaware of the CAI’s true intentions. Having
said this, there is much room to improve this kind of socially-
grounded exploitation, as more sophisticated approaches that
we used in this study could be envisioned. In particular, LLMs
could be guided to adapt more to the user, so that the CAI
would avoid some of the reciprocity strategies, like sharing
relatable experiences, which a minority of our participants
found too artificial, and focus more on other reciprocity strate-
gies, like providing a supportive environment, which none of
our participants complained about.
6.3
Recommendations for Research & Practice
Awareness of LLM-based CAI Risks.
While Zhang et
al., [111] emphasizes the need to raise awareness about
how LLMs function and their potential privacy risks in con-
versational interactions, we argue that users should also be
equipped with knowledge of advanced tactics that malicious
actors might employ. For instance, users need to understand
how strategies such as the use of reciprocal tones can be lever-
aged to elicit sensitive information. Importantly, these risks
extend beyond individual disclosures. As suggested in prior re-
search [109,111] and observed in our study (see §5.2.1), users
may reveal personal details about others—such as friends or
family members—without their knowledge or consent, a phe-
nomenon known as multiuser/interdependent privacy [38,93].
Furthermore, as these strategies could evolve, becoming in-
creasingly subtle and more persuasive, it is crucial to provide
users with timely and updated knowledge of these advance-
ments, ensuring they remain vigilant and informed. However,
privacy decisions often involve complex trade-offs, such as
deciding what to share versus conceal or selecting appropri-
ate protections. As “bounded rationality” highlights, users
have limited cognitive resources to evaluate all potential op-
tions and outcomes [88]. This challenge is heightened by the
unpredictable performance of LLMs [73]. Hence, we advo-
cate for mitigation strategies targeting developers and other
stakeholders instead of placing full responsibility on users.
Protective Mechanisms.
Future research should focus on
developing protective mechanisms for users of LLM-based
CAIs. For instance, nudges could be created to alert users
about the data being collected during interactions, making
them aware of what they share [7]. Preventive mechanisms
could also be considered, where the idea would be to stop
users from sharing information with a CAI to start with. For
this, context-aware personal information detection algorithms,
such as those proposed in [86,110], could be used. The context
here is key, as prior studies have shown that purely detect-
ing personal information disclosures is not always sufficient
because the context may determine whether the personal infor-
mation disclosure is acceptable or not [12,65]. The challenge
here would be to appropriately interpret and validate the con-
text. For instance, the reciprocity environment created by an
R-CAI may apparently seem to be an acceptable context to
disclose. Another challenge is the inferences that can be made
as further detailed next.
Inferences beyond explicit personal information.
A grand
challenge to protect users on their conversations with LLM-
based CAIs is that the inferences LLM models may make
beyond explicit personal information. This is a problem even
if participants, as shown in some cases in this study, provide
incomplete data. Existing research [92] indicates that even
partial or inaccurate data can enable LLMs to infer additional,
potentially identifying information about users. This poses a
significant privacy risk, as users may mistakenly assume that
providing misleading information offers sufficient protection.
Furthermore, the impact of inaccurate or incomplete data
on an LLM’s inference capabilities remains underexplored.
Investigating this could yield insights into the limitations of
LLM inference mechanisms and inform the development of
more effective privacy-preserving mechanisms.
Audit of LLM Applications.
Due to ethics considerations,
we deployed CAIs locally within a controlled infrastructure.
However, our findings revealed that participants, including
those who interacted with malicious CAIs, reported a compa-
rable willingness to disclose the same personal information to
popular commercial CAIs (ChatGPT). Moreover, our evalua-
tion comparing the LLMs we selected to GPT-4 showed that
our system prompts were as evasive and prompted a similar
behaviour. Therefore, commercial LLM providers, particu-
larly those with LLM app stores should pay attention to this
threat. This is even worse in stores where LLM apps can in-
tegrate third-party services, such as Actions [3] in OpenAI’s
GPTs store [4], which would allow an LLM app to use the
system prompts we provided and exfiltrate to the third party
any personal information extracted from the user. In fact, it
has been shown that, in OpenAI’s GPTs, user conversations
can be collected and exploited by third parties [39], and that
OpenAI struggles to enforce privacy policies of LLM apps in
its GPT store, allowing LLM apps that violate privacy stan-
dards [34]. LLM app platforms like the GPT store should
therefore implement robust approaches to evaluate and moni-
tor LLM apps, such as rigorous audit processes [21,66], which
also consider the threat in this paper.
6.4
Limitations
Our ethics considerations (see the Ethics Considerations sec-
tion) required the use of open-source LLM models that we
could download and use in our infrastructure, which prevented
us from using commercial LLMs like GPT-4 and Claude-
Sonnet. However, evaluation with example prompts in §4.1
showed that the LLMs we used produced comparable results
to GPT-4, suggesting our findings may also apply to commer-
cial LLMs, though future research should confirm it. Another
limitation is that the study was based on conversations over
one session, offering only a snapshot of user behaviour and
not accounting for potential changes over time. Future longitu-
dinal research could better capture any evolving user patterns.
Finally, as this study was conducted in a controlled environ-
ment, participants’ trust in the researchers may have influ-
enced their trust in the CAIs. However, we believe that this
effect, if present, does not invalidate our results for three main
reasons. First, to increase ecological validity while remaining
ethical, our study followed an incomplete disclosure proto-
col (see the Ethics Considerations section), i.e. participants
were not told the full purpose of the study at the beginning.
They only learned after finishing the study that they might
have interacted with a potentially malicious CAI. Second, our
results (§5.2.2) show statistically significant differences on
self-reported privacy and trust perceptions/practices across
treatments. This includes statistically different reporting of
fake/incomplete data across treatments, including malicious
ones: participants provided more fake data to D- and U-CAIs
than to R-CAIs. In fact, this is one of our most interesting find-
ings: malicious reciprocal CAIs elicit less but more truthful
data. Third, we confirmed (§5.2.2) by checking the data pro-
vided against other sources (Prolific) that many participants
did indeed provide fake data to the CAIs, even when they had
already shared that data with Prolific and is available to re-
searchers. The distribution of how participants would provide
fake data across treatments also suggests that the decision
to disclose fake data depended on their assigned CAI, with
stark difference between the malicious and the control AND
between the D/U and R malicious CAIs.
7
Conclusion
In this paper, we show the privacy risks posed by LLM-based
CAIs when deliberately designed to extract personal informa-
tion from users. By testing different malicious strategies, we
demonstrated that these methods significantly increase user
disclosure. Particularly, the CAIs employing the social nature
of privacy through reciprocal strategies emerged as the most
effective in extracting personal information while minimiz-
ing user awareness of privacy risks. Our study also reveals a
significant gap between users’ awareness of privacy risks and
their disclosure behaviors. Finally, we propose recommen-
dations for future research and practice aimed at addressing
these vulnerabilities. These include enhancing user literacy
about privacy risks with LLM-based CAIs, providing protec-
tion mechanisms, conducting audits of LLM apps, and further
research on the inferences LLMs can make and their impact.
Ethics Considerations
Our method and procedures were approved by our Institu-
tional Review Board. There were two main ethical considera-
tions that influenced and guided the design of our study:
The first consideration was the protection of sensitive per-
sonal data that participants may reveal during the study, as the
study precisely focuses on studying the disclosure of personal
information to LLM-based CAIs. To this end, we kept control
of the CAIs developed for our study within our university’s
infrastructure to avoid sharing/leaking any data to external
parties. All data was stored locally and processed in our insti-
tution’s High Performance Computing (HPC) infrastructure
in line with our university’s data management regulations,
with data being encrypted in transit and at rest. Therefore,
we implemented our CAIs using open-source LLMs that we
could download and run in our institution’s HPC. However,
we also provide in the paper a comparative analysis (with no
real participant data) and observe very similar responses by
commercial LLMs, which suggests commercial LLMs could
also be used maliciously in the very same way we show for
the open-source ones.
The second important ethical consideration was designing
a protocol that satisfied our duty of informed consent whilst
maintaining the ecological validity of the user study. Informed
consent lies at the core of research ethics, and it was espe-
cially important given the focus of the study on the disclosure
of personal information. At the same time, knowing that the
study was evaluating CAIs designed to elicit personal data
disclosures would have severely biased participants and thus
the robustness of the results [72]. Following best practice, we
adopted an incomplete disclosure protocol [84,96], which is
an ethical and very mild form of deception where participants
are not initially told the full purpose of the experiment. This
protocol has been extensively used in previous online privacy
studies that aim to understand personal information disclo-
sure behaviours [54,81]. Following the Windsor Deception
Checklist [75], participants were only told at the beginning
of the study that they would interact with a CAI, after which
they would be asked for feedback about their experience. At
the end of the study participants were fully debriefed on the
study’s objectives and the justification for the incomplete dis-
closure. At this stage they were given the chance to withdraw
themselves and the data they disclosed from the study with no
penalty if they wished. All the materials shown to participants
are available at the OSF repository.
Open Science
All artifacts
used in
this
study are
publicly avail-
able and can be accessed at the Zenodo repository
(https://zenodo.org/records/15610905). The repository in-
cludes detailed instructions for replicating the CAIs devel-
oped in our study (including B-CAIs, D-CAIs, U-CAIs and
R-CAIs), as well as the scripts used for the pre-evaluation and
for employing NuExtract to identify categories of personal
information in the dialogues. In addition, we also provide the
questionnaire that was used for the post-interaction questions
as well as the codebooks for the qualitative analysis.
Regarding the dataset of participant dialogues with the
CAIs, we carefully considered sharing it after anonymiza-
tion, as participants had consented to this possibility. How-
ever, during the anonymization process, we found that fully
removing identifiable details is very challenging. While ex-
plicit personal information, such as addresses, can be eas-
ily replaced with placeholders (e.g., “[Address]”), implicit,
context-dependent information remains difficult to effectively
mask. For example, a participant might disclose (note that this
example, though reflective of what we find in the data, is syn-
thetic and does not represent any actual participant from our
study) “I completed my PhD in 2015 and immediately started
working as a postdoc at [Institution]. In 2018, I was promoted
to an assistant professor position. During the pandemic in
2020, I started a popular online course on [Topic] that gained
significant attention. Recently, I moved to a leadership role
in the [Industry Company] in early 2023.”. Even without ex-
plicit identifiers, this timeline contains enough unique tempo-
ral and contextual details that, with a detailed search through
LinkedIn or course promotion platforms, it might be possible
to identify the individual with high accuracy. Moreover, it has
been shown in a prior study [92] that LLMs are capable of
inferring and identifying users even when provided with par-
tial or somewhat inaccurate data. This highlights the inherent
risks of sharing datasets containing such implicit information,
even after anonymization. As a result, this prompted us to
prioritize the privacy of our participants and not to publish
the collected dialogues publicly.
Acknowledgments
This research was partially funded by the INCIBE’s strate-
gic SPRINT (Seguridad y Privacidad en Sistemas con In-
teligencia Artificial) C063/23 project with funds from the
EU-NextGenerationEU through the Spanish government’s
Plan de Recuperación, Transformación y Resiliencia; and by
the Spanish Government via project PID2023-151536OB-I0.
References
[1] character.ai. https://character.ai/, 2023. Accessed: 2025-05.
[2] FlowGPT. https://flowgpt.com/, 2023. Accessed: 2025-01-20.
[3] GPT Actions. https://platform.openai.com/docs/actions/
introduction, 2023. Accessed: 2025-01-20.
[4] GPT Store. https://gptstore.ai/, 2023. Accessed: 2025-01-20.
[5] Poe. https://poe.com/login, 2023. Accessed: 2025-05-20.
[6] Prolific Academic. Prolific participants recruiting platform. https:
//www.prolific.com/, 2014. Accessed: 2024-08-19.
[7] Alessandro Acquisti, Idris Adjerid, Rebecca Balebako, Laura Brandi-
marte, Lorrie Faith Cranor, Saranga Komanduri, Pedro Giovanni Leon,
Norman Sadeh, Florian Schaub, Manya Sleeper, et al. Nudges for pri-
vacy and security: Understanding and assisting users’ choices online.
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 50(3):1–41, 2017.
[8] Novita AI.
Dive into uncensored llms: All you need to
know.
https://medium.com/@marketing_novita.ai/
dive-into-uncensored-llms-all-you-need-to-know-f32acd3930aa,
2024. Accessed: 2024-10-04.
[9] Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessan-
dro Cappelli, Ruxandra Cojocaru, Merouane Debbah, Etienne
Goffinet, Daniel Heslow, Julien Launay, Quentin Malartic, Badred-
dine Noune, Baptiste Pannier, and Guilherme Penedo. Falcon-40B: an
open large language model with state-of-the-art performance. 2023.
[10] Azy Barak and Orit Gluck-Ofri.
Degree and reciprocity of self-
disclosure in online forums. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 10(3):407–
417, 2007.
[11] Deanna M Barch. The dangers of small samples and insufficient
methodological detail, 2023.
[12] Hannah Brown, Katherine Lee, Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah, Reza
Shokri, and Florian Tramèr. What does it mean for a language model
to preserve privacy? In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on
Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pages 2280–2292, 2022.
[13] Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee,
Florian Tramer, and Chiyuan Zhang.
Quantifying memorization
across neural language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.07646,
2022.
[14] Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski,
Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn
Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, et al. Extracting training data from large
language models. In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security 21), pages 2633–2650, 2021.
[15] Gary Charness, Uri Gneezy, and Michael A Kuhn. Experimental
methods: Between-subject and within-subject design. Journal of
economic behavior & organization, 81(1):1–8, 2012.
[16] Banghao Chen, Zhaofeng Zhang, Nicolas Langrené, and Shengxin
Zhu. Unleashing the potential of prompt engineering in large language
models: a comprehensive review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.14735,
2023.
[17] Chen Chen, Xuanli He, Lingjuan Lyu, and Fangzhao Wu. Killing one
bird with two stones: Model extraction and attribute inference attacks
against bert-based apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.10909, 2021.
[18] Qian Qian Chen and Hyun Jung Park. How anthropomorphism affects
trust in intelligent personal assistants. Industrial Management & Data
Systems, 121(12):2722–2737, 2021.
[19] Alexandre
Constantin,
Liam
Cripwell,
and
Etienne
Bernard.
Nuextract:
A
foundation
model
for
structured
extraction.
https://numind.ai/blog/
nuextract-a-foundation-model-for-structured-extraction,
2024. Accessed: 2024-08-19.
[20] Coze. Coze. https://www.coze.com/, 2024. Accessed: 2024-11-
07.
[21] Tianyu Cui, Yanling Wang, Chuanpu Fu, Yong Xiao, Sijia Li, Xinhao
Deng, Yunpeng Liu, Qinglin Zhang, Ziyi Qiu, Peiyang Li, et al. Risk
taxonomy, mitigation, and assessment benchmarks of large language
model systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05778, 2024.
[22] Tamara Dinev and Paul Hart. An extended privacy calculus model for
e-commerce transactions. Information systems research, 17(1):61–80,
2006.
[23] Alexis Dinno. Nonparametric pairwise multiple comparisons in inde-
pendent groups using dunn’s test. The Stata Journal, 15(1):292–300,
2015.
[24] Hugging Face. Chat Templates. https://huggingface.co/docs/
transformers/en/chat_templating, 2021. Accessed: 2025-01-
13.
[25] Cori Faklaris, Laura A Dabbish, and Jason I Hong. A {Self-Report}
measure of {End-User} security attitudes (sa-6). In Fifteenth Sympo-
sium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS 2019), pages 61–77,
2019.
[26] Franz Faul, Edgar Erdfelder, Axel Buchner, and Albert-Georg Lang.
Statistical power analyses using g* power 3.1: Tests for correlation and
regression analyses. Behavior research methods, 41(4):1149–1160,
2009.
[27] Joseph L Fleiss, Bruce Levin, and Myunghee Cho Paik. Statistical
methods for rates and proportions. john wiley & sons, 2013.
[28] Wenjie Fu, Huandong Wang, Chen Gao, Guanghua Liu, Yong Li, and
Tao Jiang. Practical membership inference attacks against fine-tuned
large language models via self-prompt calibration. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.06062, 2023.
[29] General Data Protection Regulation GDPR. General data protection
regulation. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural
persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC, 2016.
[30] Nina Gerber, Paul Gerber, and Melanie Volkamer. Explaining the pri-
vacy paradox: A systematic review of literature investigating privacy
attitude and behavior. Computers & security, 77:226–261, 2018.
[31] Shirley Anugrah Hayati, Dongyeop Kang, Qingxiaoyang Zhu, Weiyan
Shi, and Zhou Yu. Inspired: Toward sociable recommendation dialog
systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.14306, 2020.
[32] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas
Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt.
Measuring massive
multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03300,
2020.
[33] Giwon Hong, Aryo Pradipta Gema, Rohit Saxena, Xiaotang Du, Ping
Nie, Yu Zhao, Laura Perez-Beltrachini, Max Ryabinin, Xuanli He,
Clémentine Fourrier, and Pasquale Minervini. The hallucinations
leaderboard - an open effort to measure hallucinations in large lan-
guage models. CoRR, abs/2404.05904, 2024.
[34] Xinyi Hou, Yanjie Zhao, and Haoyu Wang. On the (in) security of
llm app stores. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08422, 2024.
[35] Hongsheng Hu, Zoran Salcic, Lichao Sun, Gillian Dobbie, Philip S
Yu, and Xuyun Zhang. Membership inference attacks on machine
learning: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(11s):1–37,
2022.
[36] Peng Hu, Yaobin Lu, et al. Dual humanness and trust in conversational
ai: A person-centered approach. Computers in Human Behavior,
119:106727, 2021.
[37] Jie Huang, Hanyin Shao, and Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang. Are large
pre-trained language models leaking your personal information? arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.12628, 2022.
[38] Mathias Humbert, Benjamin Trubert, and Kévin Huguenin. A survey
on interdependent privacy. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 52(6):1–
40, 2019.
[39] Evin Jaff, Yuhao Wu, Ning Zhang, and Umar Iqbal. Data exposure
from llm apps: An in-depth investigation of openai’s gpts. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2408.13247, 2024.
[40] Siwon Kim, Sangdoo Yun, Hwaran Lee, Martin Gubri, Sungroh Yoon,
and Seong Joon Oh. Propile: Probing privacy leakage in large lan-
guage models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
36, 2024.
[41] Sunnie SY Kim, Elizabeth Anne Watkins, Olga Russakovsky, Ruth
Fong, and Andrés Monroy-Hernández. Humans, ai, and context: Un-
derstanding end-users’ trust in a real-world computer vision appli-
cation. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency, pages 77–88, 2023.
[42] Yujin Kim, Jennifer Dykema, John Stevenson, Penny Black, and
D Paul Moberg.
Straightlining: Overview of measurement, com-
parison of indicators, and effects in mail–web mixed-mode surveys.
Social Science Computer Review, 37(2):214–233, 2019.
[43] Spyros Kokolakis. Privacy attitudes and privacy behaviour: A review
of current research on the privacy paradox phenomenon. Computers
& security, 64:122–134, 2017.
[44] Udo Kuckartz. Qualitative text analysis: A guide to methods, practice
and using software. Sage, 2014.
[45] JR Landis. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical
data. Biometrics, 1977.
[46] SeoYoung Lee and Junho Choi. Enhancing user experience with
conversational agent for movie recommendation: Effects of self-
disclosure and reciprocity. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies, 103:95–105, 2017.
[47] Yi-Chieh Lee, Naomi Yamashita, Yun Huang, and Wai Fu. " i hear
you, i feel you": encouraging deep self-disclosure through a chatbot.
In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in
computing systems, pages 1–12, 2020.
[48] Yuhua Li, David McLean, Zuhair A Bandar, James D O’shea, and
Keeley Crockett. Sentence similarity based on semantic nets and cor-
pus statistics. IEEE transactions on knowledge and data engineering,
18(8):1138–1150, 2006.
[49] Kai-Hui Liang, Weiyan Shi, Yoo Jung Oh, Hao-Chuan Wang, Jing-
wen Zhang, and Zhou Yu. Dialoging resonance in human-chatbot
conversation: How users perceive and reciprocate recommendation
chatbot’s self-disclosure strategy. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-
Computer Interaction, 8(CSCW1):1–28, 2024.
[50] Yuting Liao, Jessica Vitak, Priya Kumar, Michael Zimmer, and Kather-
ine Kritikos. Understanding the role of privacy and trust in intelligent
personal assistant adoption. In Information in Contemporary Soci-
ety: 14th International Conference, iConference 2019, Washington,
DC, USA, March 31–April 3, 2019, Proceedings 14, pages 102–113.
Springer, 2019.
[51] Zilong Lin, Jian Cui, Xiaojing Liao, and XiaoFeng Wang. Malla:
Demystifying real-world large language model integrated malicious
services. In 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24),
2024.
[52] Nils Lukas, Ahmed Salem, Robert Sim, Shruti Tople, Lukas Wutschitz,
and Santiago Zanella-Béguelin. Analyzing leakage of personally iden-
tifiable information in language models. In 2023 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (SP), pages 346–363. IEEE, 2023.
[53] Rongjun Ma, Caterina Maidhof, Juan Carlos Carrillo, Janne Lindqvist,
and Jose Such. Privacy perceptions of custom gpts by users and
creators. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–18, 2025.
[54] Miguel Malheiros, Sören Preibusch, and M Angela Sasse. “fairly
truthful”: The impact of perceived effort, fairness, relevance, and
sensitivity on personal data disclosure. In Trust and Trustworthy
Computing: 6th International Conference, TRUST 2013, London, UK,
June 17-19, 2013, Proceedings, volume 7904, page 250. Springer,
2013.
[55] Naresh K Malhotra, Sung S Kim, and James Agarwal. Internet users’
information privacy concerns (iuipc): The construct, the scale, and a
causal model. Information systems research, 15(4):336–355, 2004.
[56] Frank J Massey Jr. The kolmogorov-smirnov test for goodness of fit.
Journal of the American statistical Association, 46(253):68–78, 1951.
[57] Justus Mattern, Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah, Zhijing Jin, Bernhard
Schölkopf, Mrinmaya Sachan, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. Mem-
bership inference attacks against language models via neighbourhood
comparison. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18462, 2023.
[58] Erika McCallister. Guide to protecting the confidentiality of personally
identifiable information. Diane Publishing, 2010.
[59] R Thomas McCoy, Paul Smolensky, Tal Linzen, Jianfeng Gao, and
Asli Celikyilmaz. How much do language models copy from their
training data? evaluating linguistic novelty in text generation using
raven. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
11:652–670, 2023.
[60] Omri Mendels, Coby Peled, Nava Vaisman Levy, Sharon Hart, Tomer
Rosenthal, Limor Lahiani, et al. Microsoft Presidio: Context aware,
pluggable and customizable pii anonymization service for text and
images. https://microsoft.github.io/presidio/, 2018. Ac-
cessed: 2024-12-04.
[61] George R Milne, George Pettinico, Fatima M Hajjat, and Ereni Markos.
Information sensitivity typology: Mapping the degree and type of risk
consumers perceive in personal data sharing. Journal of Consumer
Affairs, 51(1):133–161, 2017.
[62] Caroline Lancelot Miltgen and H Jeff Smith. Falsifying and with-
holding: exploring individuals’ contextual privacy-related decision-
making. Information & management, 56(5):696–717, 2019.
[63] Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah, Kartik Goyal, Archit Uniyal, Taylor
Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Reza Shokri. Quantifying privacy risks of
masked language models using membership inference attacks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.03929, 2022.
[64] Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah, Archit Uniyal, Tianhao Wang, David K
Evans, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. An empirical analysis of memo-
rization in fine-tuned autoregressive language models. In Proceedings
of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 1816–1826, 2022.
[65] Niloofar Mireshghallah, Maria Antoniak, Yash More, Yejin Choi,
and Golnoosh Farnadi.
Trust no bot: Discovering personal dis-
closures in human-llm conversations in the wild.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.11438, 2024.
[66] Jakob Mökander, Jonas Schuett, Hannah Rose Kirk, and Luciano
Floridi. Auditing large language models: a three-layered approach.
AI and Ethics, pages 1–31, 2023.
[67] Milad Nasr, Nicholas Carlini, Jonathan Hayase, Matthew Jagielski,
A Feder Cooper, Daphne Ippolito, Christopher A Choquette-Choo,
Eric Wallace, Florian Tramèr, and Katherine Lee. Scalable extraction
of training data from (production) language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.17035, 2023.
[68] Manisha Natarajan and Matthew Gombolay. Effects of anthropo-
morphism and accountability on trust in human robot interaction.
In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM/IEEE international conference on
human-robot interaction, pages 33–42, 2020.
[69] Numind.
NuExtract Benchmark.
https://huggingface.co/
numind/NuExtract, 2024. Accessed: 2024-10-05.
[70] NuMind. Solve your use case. https://numind.ai/use-cases,
2024. Accessed: 2024-10-04.
[71] OpenAI.
Gpts.
https://chatgpt.com/gpts, 2024.
Accessed:
2024-11-07.
[72] Martin T Orne and Charles H Holland. On the ecological validity of
laboratory deceptions. International Journal of Psychiatry, 6(4):282–
293, 1968.
[73] Stephen Ornes.
The Unpredictable Abilities Emerging From
Large
AI
Models.
https://www.quantamagazine.org/
the-unpredictable-abilities-emerging-from-large-ai-models-20230316
?utm_source=chatgpt.com, 2023. Accessed: 2025-01-20.
[74] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wain-
wright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina
Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instruc-
tions with human feedback. Advances in neural information process-
ing systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.
[75] Antonio Pascual-Leone, Terence Singh, and Alan Scoboria. Using
deception ethically: Practical research guidelines for researchers and
reviewers. Canadian Psychology/psychologie canadienne, 51(4):241,
2010.
[76] Eyal Peer, Joachim Vosgerau, and Alessandro Acquisti. Reputation
as a sufficient condition for data quality on amazon mechanical turk.
Behavior research methods, 46(4):1023–1031, 2014.
[77] Valentina Pitardi and Hannah R Marriott. Alexa, she’s not human
but... unveiling the drivers of consumers’ trust in voice-based artifi-
cial intelligence. Psychology & Marketing, 38(4):626–642, 2021.
[78] Privacy Office, Department of Homeland Security.
Handbook
for Safeguarding Sensitive Personally Identifying Information.
Privacy Office, Department of Homeland Security, 2012. https://
www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/2024-03/17_1204_priv_
handbooksafeguardingsensitivepii_rev3_047-01-007.pdf.
[79] Qualtrics. Qualtrics. https://www.qualtrics.com/uk/, 2020. Ac-
cessed: 2024-08-19.
[80] Quiq.
Llm
powered ai
assistant.
https://quiq.com/
llm-ai-assistant-demo/, 2024. Accessed: 2024-11-07.
[81] Kopo M Ramokapane, Gaurav Misra, Jose Such, and Sören Preibusch.
Truth or dare: Understanding and predicting how users lie and provide
untruthful data online. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI conference on
human factors in computing systems, pages 1–15, 2021.
[82] Abhilasha Ravichander and Alan W Black. An empirical study of
self-disclosure in spoken dialogue systems. In Proceedings of the 19th
annual SIGdial meeting on discourse and dialogue, pages 253–263,
2018.
[83] Pranab Sahoo, Ayush Kumar Singh, Sriparna Saha, Vinija Jain, Samrat
Mondal, and Aman Chadha. A systematic survey of prompt engineer-
ing in large language models: Techniques and applications. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.07927, 2024.
[84] Abraham P Schwab. Deception by omission. The american journal
of bioethics, 13(11):52–53, 2013.
[85] William Seymour and Max Van Kleek. Exploring interactions be-
tween trust, anthropomorphism, and relationship development in voice
assistants. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction,
5(CSCW2):1–16, 2021.
[86] Yijia Shao, Tianshi Li, Weiyan Shi, Yanchen Liu, and Diyi Yang.
Privacylens: Evaluating privacy norm awareness of language models
in action. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2024.
[87] Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov.
Membership inference attacks against machine learning models. In
2017 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP), pages 3–18.
IEEE, 2017.
[88] Herbert A Simon. Bounded rationality. Utility and probability, pages
15–18, 1990.
[89] Natalie Smithson.
How to bring llms into your customer
service support (and should you)?
https://ebi.ai/blog/
llms-customer-service/, 2024. Accessed: 2024-11-07.
[90] TNS Infratest Sozialforschung. Soep 2011–methodenbericht zum
befragungsjahr 2011 (welle 28) des sozio-oekonomischen panels.
SOEP Survey Papers, 75, 2012.
[91] Lars St, Svante Wold, et al. Analysis of variance (anova). Chemomet-
rics and intelligent laboratory systems, 6(4):259–272, 1989.
[92] Robin Staab, Mark Vero, Mislav Balunovi´c, and Martin Vechev. Be-
yond memorization: Violating privacy via inference with large lan-
guage models. In Proceedings of the ICLR International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2024.
[93] Jose Such and Natalia Criado. Multiparty privacy in social media.
Communications of the ACM (CACM), 61(8):74–81, 2018.
[94] Guangzhi Sun, Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, Kunat Pipatanakul,
Chao Zhang, Phil Woodland, and Mark Gales. Crosscheckgpt: Uni-
versal hallucination ranking for multimodal foundation models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.13684, 2024.
[95] Monika Taddicken. The ‘privacy paradox’in the social web: The
impact of privacy concerns, individual characteristics, and the per-
ceived social relevance on different forms of self-disclosure. Journal
of computer-mediated communication, 19(2):248–273, 2014.
[96] Michael Cheng-Tek Tai. Deception and informed consent in social,
behavioral, and educational research (sber). Tzu Chi Medical Journal,
24(4):218–222, 2012.
[97] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman
Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand
Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and
efficient foundation language models, 2023.
[98] U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Health Information
Privacy.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2022.
https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/index.html.
[99] András Vargha and Harold D Delaney. The kruskal-wallis test and
stochastic homogeneity. Journal of Educational and behavioral Statis-
tics, 23(2):170–192, 1998.
[100] Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki.
GPT-J-6B: A 6 Billion Pa-
rameter Autoregressive Language Model. https://github.com/
kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax, 2021. Accessed: 2024-09-
20.
[101] Ian Webster, Michael D’Angelo, and Steven Klein. Promptfoo. https:
//www.promptfoo.dev/, 2024. Accessed: 2024-12-09.
[102] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia,
Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompt-
ing elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
[103] Laura Weidinger, Jonathan Uesato, Maribeth Rauh, Conor Griffin, Po-
Sen Huang, John Mellor, Amelia Glaese, Myra Cheng, Borja Balle,
Atoosa Kasirzadeh, et al.
Taxonomy of risks posed by language
models. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency, pages 214–229, 2022.
[104] Jules White, Quchen Fu, Sam Hays, Michael Sandborn, Carlos Olea,
Henry Gilbert, Ashraf Elnashar, Jesse Spencer-Smith, and Douglas C
Schmidt. A prompt pattern catalog to enhance prompt engineering
with chatgpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11382, 2023.
[105] Ting Yan. Nondifferentiation. Encyclopedia of survey research meth-
ods, 2:520–521, 2008.
[106] Yinfei Yang, Steve Yuan, Daniel Cer, Sheng-yi Kong, Noah Con-
stant, Petr Pilar, Heming Ge, Yun-Hsuan Sung, Brian Strope, and Ray
Kurzweil. Learning semantic textual similarity from conversations.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.07754, 2018.
[107] Da Yu, Peter Kairouz, Sewoong Oh, and Zheng Xu.
Privacy-
preserving instructions for aligning large language models. In Pro-
ceedings of the ICML International Conference on Machine Learning,
2024.
[108] Xiao Zhan, Noura Abdi, William Seymour, and Jose Such. Healthcare
voice ai assistants: Factors influencing trust and intention to use. Pro-
ceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 8(CSCW1):1–
37, 2024.
[109] Xiao Zhan, William Seymour, and Jose Such. Beyond individual
concerns: multi-user privacy in large language models. In Proceedings
of the 6th ACM Conference on Conversational User Interfaces, pages
1–6, 2024.
[110] Kailin Zhang and Xinying Qiu. Comparing feature-based and context-
aware approaches to pii generalization level prediction. In 2024 In-
ternational Conference on Asian Language Processing (IALP), pages
114–119. IEEE, 2024.
[111] Zhiping Zhang, Michelle Jia, Hao-Ping Lee, Bingsheng Yao, Sauvik
Das, Ada Lerner, Dakuo Wang, and Tianshi Li. “it’s a fair game”, or is
it? examining how users navigate disclosure risks and benefits when
using llm-based conversational agents. In Proceedings of the CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–26,
2024.
A
Appendix
A.1
Non-CAI Experiment: Form Treatment
In addition to the CAIs developed and used in the experiments
reported in the main body of this paper, we explored an alter-
native, additional and non-CAI treatment. This new treatment
involved presenting a form upfront before the interaction with
the CAI that invited users to voluntarily share personal details
for a more personalized experience with the CAI. This was
done to compare how much personal data participants would
disclose to a form as opposed to when conversing with one
of our CAIs. We conducted this new “form treatment” with
50 new participants who had not taken part in the study re-
ported in the main body of the paper. We then compared their
behaviour with that of participants from two treatments in our
main study: the user-benefit strategy with L70 LLM (U/L70)
and the social reciprocal strategy with L70 LLM (R/L70),
which had 40 and 43 participants, respectively, already re-
ported in our results in the main body of the paper. These two
treatments were selected for comparison because they were
the ones in which malicious CAIs were most successful at
eliciting personal information disclosures from participants.
Overall, we found that participants in the malicious CAIs
treatments in the main body of the paper disclosed way more
personal information than in the new form treatment.
A.1.1
Form Treatment Design & Procedure
Form Design. As reported in the main body of the paper, the
CAIs we developed for our study were designed to engage
in free-form conversations with participants. During these
interactions, the CAIs could ask about a wide range of per-
sonal topics, with no a priori or fixed structure. This dynamic
approach is difficult to replicate using a form presented up-
front, as it is not possible to predict in advance what types of
personal information might be requested by CAIs. Therefore,
to compare with CAI treatments, we designed a simple form
that includes both bounded information (e.g., demographic
categories) that CAIs asked during some conversations and
unbounded information collected via open-text responses. For
the (bounded) demographic information, we selected the de-
mographic attributes from the top-30 categories of personal
information actually disclosed during interactions with the
CAIs in our main study (see Figure 3). In our original CAI ex-
periments, participants had full autonomy to choose whether
or not to share personal information with the CAI. To mirror
this in the form designed, we stated in the form that provid-
ing the information was optional. Furthermore, to mitigate
potential biases, we randomised the order in which demo-
graphic options were presented to participants. The simple
form contains the following components:
Before chatting with the chatbot, you have the possibility to pro-
vide information about you for a better and more personalised
experience. This is entirely optional, you may not provide any
information or just some, your choice.
[displayed in random order:]
- Provide Data
- Continue Without
If “Provide Data” was selected:
[displayed in random order:]
- Age
- Gender
- Employment status
- Ethnicity
- Country of Residence
- Nationality Citizenship
- Education
- City
- Martial status
- Place of birth
- State
- Income level
- Religion
- Number of Children
- Is there any other personal information that could help us
provide a better and more personalised experience?
Procedure. In the new form treatment, participants followed
the same overall procedure as in our study reported in the
main body of the paper, with one difference: before interact-
ing with the CAI, participants were shown the form, and after
that, they were directed to the debrief section without CAI
interaction. The incomplete disclosure protocol was therefore
also used in this new form treatment. Participants were ini-
tially informed that the information they provided would be
used to personalise their interaction with the CAI, although
no personalisation was actually applied. The debriefing form
thoroughly explained what had occurred and why there was
no CAI interaction. Specifically, we were unable to provide
personalisation, and the purpose was solely to observe what
personal information participants would be willing to dis-
close in exchange for a promised personalised experience
with a CAI. Given that our original study included a base-
line treatment in which participants interacted with a benign
CAI—one that elicited significantly less personal information
than the malicious ones — we determined that including such
a baseline in the form treatment (i.e., adding a benign CAI
interaction) would be redundant.
Two pilot studies with 35 participants in total were con-
ducted to test clarity, estimate time requirements, and inform
participant compensation. Pilot data were excluded from the
final analysis.
A.1.2
Form Treatment Results
Participants. 50 new, extra participants, not in the main
study reported in the main body of the paper, were recruited
to go through the new form treatment. That is, they were
assigned the new form treatment. Gender was balanced (50%
female, 50% male) and ages ranged from 19 to 81 years
(Mean = 38.32, Median = 33, σ = 15.46). Most participants
were employed full-time (48%) and not students (66%), and
from the UK (30%), USA (22%), and EU (12%). Finally,
participants identified as White (52%), Black (26%), Asian
(8%), or other (14%).
Personal Information Disclosure. In the new form treatment,
12 participants (24%) chose to disclose personal information,
while the remaining 38 (76%) opted not to. Of those who
disclosed information, only 3 participants completed all fields
in the form, including both bounded and unbounded data.
The other 9 participants filled out only portions of the form,
indicating they selectively disclosed the information they
wished to share. The only three unbounded responses were: “I
like country music” (P13(F)), “I like to travel” (P31(F)), and
“I love my family and I also enjoy reading books” (P44(F)).
We checked the demographics provided in the form with
participants’ Prolific records and found that the 3 participants
who completed all fields provided false information. Aside
from these three, one additional participant also provided
false data. The remaining participants provided accurate
demographic information.
A.1.3
Comparison with Main Study
We now compare the results of the new form treatment with
two treatments in our main study (already reported in the
main body of the paper): the user-benefit strategy with L70
LLM (U/L70) and the social reciprocal strategy with L70
LLM (R/L70), which had 40 and 43 participants, respectively.
These two treatments were selected for comparison because
they were the ones in which malicious CAIs were most
successful at eliciting personal information disclosures from
participants.
Participants disclosing personal information. First, we
compared the new form experiment with the two existing ones
based on the number of participants in each treatment that
disclosed personal information. 39/40 (97.5%) participants
and 40/43 (93%) participants disclosed personal information
in the U/L70 and R/L70 CAI treatments, respectively. This
sharply contrasts with the results reported above for the new
form treatment, in which only 12/50 (24%) of participants
disclosed personal information.
Response Rate. Second, since the CAIs developed in
our original study engaged participants in open-ended
conversations, the timing, type, and manner of personal
information requests were inherently unpredictable and
context-dependent. In some cases, the CAI may have asked
multiple times for personal information without receiving any
disclosure. Thus, besides measuring the disclosure rate, we
also measured participants’ responsiveness. To do this, we
manually reviewed the dialogues from the U/L70 and R/L70
treatments. Specifically, we examined whether participants
responded when the CAI explicitly asked them for personal
information. On average, participants in responded to
84% and 88% of such questions in the U/L70 and R/L70,
respectively. In sharp contrast, only 6% of participants in
the new form treatment completed every field in the form.
This indicates that CAIs were not only way more effective
in making more people disclose personal data but also in
making participants respond to more data requests than the
form.
Unbounded Data. Finally, while only 3 participants in the
new form treatment voluntarily shared unbounded informa-
tion, a significantly higher proportion did so in the U/L70
and R/L70 treatments in our original study: 37 participants
(92.5%) in U/L70 and 39 participants (90.7%) in R/L70 dis-
closed additional information beyond the bounded fields in-
cluded in the form, such as their living status, details about
family members, and any health problems they experienced.
Moreover, the unbounded personal information obtained by
the malicious CAIs in our original study was much more
in-depth and detailed compared to the information collected
through the form. For example, P480(R/L70) asked for honey-
moon advice, which led the R/L70 to prompt further questions
about the participant’s romantic experiences, such as “How
did you meet?” and “Are you planning a wedding soon?” In
response, the participant shared: “We’re going to get married
and honeymoon with the family all at the beach in August.
I’m excited for all of it. We were 16 when we met. We were
good friends for a while but we grew closer slowly over time.
My mom was actually against it and still is, but I know what’s
best for my life, so I’m OK with it.” In contrast, unbounded
disclosures in the new form treatment were far more limited
in depth, for example, “I like country music” (P13(F)). This
suggests that the conversational and dynamic nature of the
CAIs in the main study encouraged participants to share richer
and more personal narratives.
