Goodness-of-pronunciation without phoneme time alignment
Jeremy H. M. Wong and Nancy F. Chen
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R), A⋆STAR, Singapore
jeremy wong@i2r.a-star.edu.sg
Abstract—In speech evaluation, an Automatic Speech Recognition
(ASR) model often computes time boundaries and phoneme posteriors for
input features. However, limited data for ASR training hinders expansion
of speech evaluation to low-resource languages. Open-source weakly-
supervised models are capable of ASR over many languages, but they
are frame-asynchronous and not phonemic, hindering feature extraction
for speech evaluation. This paper proposes to overcome incompatibilities
for feature extraction with weakly-supervised models, easing expansion
of speech evaluation to low-resource languages. Phoneme posteriors
are computed by mapping ASR hypotheses to a phoneme confusion
network. Word instead of phoneme-level speaking rate and duration
are used. Phoneme and frame-level features are combined using a
cross-attention architecture, obviating phoneme time alignment. This
performs comparably with standard frame-synchronous features on
English speechocean762 and low-resource Tamil datasets.
Index Terms—Goodness-of-pronunciation, Whisper, speech evaluation,
confusion network, low-resource
I. INTRODUCTION
Speech evaluation aims to automatically grade the oral proﬁciency
of a speaker. This is useful in computer-aided language learning sce-
narios, such as to provide feedback to language learners practising to
speak with automatic applications. This paper focuses on evaluation
of read speech, where the input is speech and the text that should
have been read, and the output is a proﬁciency score. Like many other
tasks, the challenge of data scarcity is often encountered in speech
evaluation. This is especially so when developing a system for a low-
resource language. In systems such as [1]–[6], which this paper’s
setup is an extension of, a frame-synchronous Automatic Speech
Recognition (ASR) model is ﬁrst used to force align the speech with
the transcript, to compute time boundaries and phoneme posteriors,
which are then used to derive features to perform speech evaluation
on. This ASR model needs to be trained on sufﬁciently diverse
paired speech-text data to yield robust performance. The difﬁculty of
collecting such data for low-resource languages hinders the expansion
of speech evaluation to these languages. However, the function of
the ASR model itself is only for feature extraction, while a separate
model is often responsible for the primary speech evaluation task. It
thus seems suboptimal that limited availability of ASR training data
restricts the development of a speech evaluation system.
The recent developments of speech foundation models offer hope
to overcome this limitation. These foundation models are pre-trained
on large quantities of diverse data, using either weakly-supervised
learning [7] or Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) [8]–[10]. This relies
on either diversely labelled or unlabelled data, which is easier to
obtain than paired speech and annotated transcript data. Furthermore,
many speech foundation models are open-source and easily available.
These models have been shown to generalise over a broad range of
tasks and languages, and may empower the expansion of downstream
tasks to low-resource languages.
This paper aims to ease the expansion of speech evaluation to
low-resource languages, by overcoming the scarcity of paired speech-
text data for ASR model development. The proposal is to leverage
existing weakly-supervised multi-lingual speech foundation models
to extract the features needed for speech evaluation. However, some
multi-lingual weakly-supervised models, such as Whisper [7], are
not frame-synchronous and do not explicitly model phonemes. These
hinder the computation of time boundaries and phoneme posteriors.
The issues described in more detail are that, ﬁrst, the model may not
express phonemes in its output and may format the text. For example,
Whisper outputs byte-level byte-pair encoding [11] of the display-
formatted text. Second, the frame-asynchronous nature of the model
hinders the computation of time alignments. This paper proposes
to address these incompatibilities by computing phoneme posteriors
from a phoneme-level Confusion Network (CN), obtained from an
N-best list generated by the weakly-supervised model. The N-best
list is text normalised and mapped to phonemes through a lexicon.
It is also proposed to replace the phoneme-level Speaking Rate (SR)
and Normalised Duration (ND) features, which require phoneme time
alignments, with the word level, for which word time alignments can
be computed from the Whisper attention weights.
SSL models offer another way to alleviate data scarcity. Features
extracted from these are informative for a variety of downstream
tasks. A task-speciﬁc downstream model can be trained upon these
features on limited labelled data. Using SSL features has been found
to often improve the downstream model performance [8]. For speech
evaluation, SSL features have been used in mispronunciation detec-
tion [12]–[14] and predicting other proﬁciency aspects [15], [16].
The transcription of the speech can also be used as a complementary
input to the model [17]. This paper likewise also uses SSL features
as one input to a speech evaluation model. In setups such as [1]–
[6], input features to the speech evaluation model are expressed per
phoneme. Using per-frame SSL features together with per-phoneme
features requires a phoneme time alignment. In [4], [6], the SSL
features are ﬁrst averaged over the frames that are aligned with
each canonical phoneme, and then concatenated with the other per-
phoneme features. A lack of phoneme time alignments from frame-
asynchronous weakly-supervised models hinders such per-phoneme
averaging of the SSL features. Rather than averaging the SSL features
per phoneme from known alignments, this paper instead proposes to
use a cross-attention layer to combine the per-phoneme features with
the per-frame SSL features.
These proposals eliminate the need to train a language-speciﬁc
ASR model for feature extraction, thereby easing the expansion
of speech evaluation to new languages that are already supported
by multi-lingual open-source models. Such language expansion is
demonstrated by experimenting on the low-resource Tamil language.
Although the experiments use Whisper in this paper, the proposals
are also applicable to other open-source ASR models.
Although these proposals obviate paired speech-text data for ASR
model training, speech-text-score data is still needed to train the
read-speech evaluation model. The text here can be the transcript
that is meant to be read, which is more easily obtainable than an
annotation of what the speaker actually uttered. On the other hand,
for ASR model training, mismatches between the reference text and
speech content may be detrimental to the model performance, and
therefore additional effort is required to manually annotate what
arXiv:2603.25150v1  [cs.CL]  26 Mar 2026
the speaker actually uttered. For speech evaluation, the reference
score is manually annotated here. Works in [18]–[20] consider
speech evaluation approaches that do not require annotated scores
for training.
II. SPEECH EVALUATION MODEL AND FEATURES
The task is to evaluate the oral proﬁciency of a speaker as they
read off a transcript. This paper expands upon the speech evaluation
system setup that follows the general architecture in [4], [6]. The
baseline architecture is shown in Fig. 1a. This computes per-phoneme
features (i.e. one feature vector for each phoneme in the sentence)
of the Goodness-Of-Pronunciation (GOP), Log-Phoneme Posterior
(LPP), Log-Posterior Ratio (LPR), SR, ND, and Phoneme Embedding
(PE). Per-frame features of pitch and embeddings extracted from a
weighted sum across layers of an SSL model are also computed. The
SSL model here is wav2vec 2.0 XLSR-53 [21], which is pre-trained
on multiple languages. The per-frame features are then converted to
per-phoneme representations by mean-pooling over the frames that
are aligned with each phoneme. These are then concatenated with
the other per-phoneme features, and used as inputs to the speech
evaluation model. The speech evaluation model ﬁrst linearly projects
the input to a reduced 24 dimensions, followed by 3 layers of 8-
headed transformer encoder layers. Single-headed sentence pooling
then converts the per-phoneme sequence to a sentence-level repre-
sentation. There is then a ReLU hidden layer, followed by a softmax
output that classiﬁes between possible sentence-level oral proﬁciency
scores.
Each of the feature types is now described in more detail. Let the
time-normalised log-posterior probability of a phoneme be
φi (ρ) =
1
te
 ρref
i

−ts
 ρref
i

+ 1
te(ρref
i )
X
t=ts(ρref
i )
log P (ρt = ρ|O) ,
(1)
where ρ is a phoneme, ρref
i
is the ith correct canonical phoneme in
the sentence that should have been read, ts and te are the start and
end frame indexes of the occurrence of that phoneme respectively,
t is a frame index, and O is the acoustic observation. When using
a frame-synchronous ASR model, the times can be computed from
a numerator lattice forced-alignment between the speech and the
text that should have been read. In [22], the per-frame phoneme
posterior, P (ρt|O), is computed as the softmax output of the
neural network acoustic model, avoiding the computation expense
of denominator lattice forward-backward operations. The duration
normalisation encourages GOP features from phonemes with different
durations to reside within similar dynamic ranges. The GOP is the
time-normalised log-posterior probability of a canonical phoneme
[22],
GOPi = φi

ρref
i

.
(2)
A commonly-used variant is to measure the margin between the log-
posteriors of the canonical and most likely phonemes [22],
GOPmargin,i = φi

ρref
i

−max
ρ
φi (ρ) .
(3)
LPP and LPR features are often also used for speech evaluation
[22]. LPP is deﬁned as a vector of the log-posteriors of all phonemes,
such that
LPPi = [φi (ρ) , ∀ρ ∈P] ,
(4)
where P is the set of all phonemes. The LPR is the log-ratio between
the posteriors of each phoneme and the canonical,
LPRi =
h
φi

ρref
i

−φi (ρ) , ∀ρ ∈P
i
.
(5)
The GOP, LPP, and LPR provide information about confusability
between phonemes that are pronounced, as perceived by the ASR
model.
The SR is the rate at which the canonical phoneme is spoken [1],
speaking ratei =
1
te
 ρref
i

−ts
 ρref
i
.
(6)
The ND is the time taken to utter the canonical phoneme, normalised
over all phonemes and utterances [1],
normalised phoneme durationi = te
 ρref
i

−ts
 ρref
i

−µ
σ
,
(7)
where µ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of the un-
normalised phoneme durations, te −ts, respectively. These features
are indicative of the speaker’s ﬂuency.
PE may represent semantic information, analogously to word
embeddings [23]. These were extracted from a 32-node recurrent
neural network continuous skip-gram language model [23], which
was trained on the non-silence canonical phoneme sequences of the
speech evaluation datasets. Pitch was computed using the approach
in [24], and may inform about the speaker’s intonation.
III. COMPUTING FEATURES FROM WHISPER
Open-source multi-lingual models allow for easy development of
speech processing on a variety of languages, many of which that are
supported are considered as low-resourced. For speech evaluation,
this may simplify the expansion of applications to new languages.
One such model is Whisper, which is trained in a weakly-supervised
manner toward a variety of tasks, one of which is ASR. Whisper is
designed with an attention encoder-decoder architecture [25], which
is frame-asynchronous and thus does not directly yield time align-
ments. Whisper also outputs formatted byte-pair encoding tokens,
from which the computation of phoneme posteriors is not trivial.
The formatted output may also not adequately express disﬂuencies,
which may be useful information for speech evaluation. Work in
[26] considers improving the disﬂuency expression of Whisper using
prompt tuning, and is orthogonal to this paper.
Consider the text formatting and lack of expression of phonemes.
The weakly-supervised model can be used to compute ASR hy-
potheses, expressed as an N-best list of word sequences. This paper
proposes to use rule-based text normalisation to standardise casing,
remove punctuations, and express numbers in spoken form. A lexicon
is used to convert words into phoneme sequences. Although Whisper
can be prompted to transcribe in a speciﬁed target language, words
that do not belong to that language may still be found within
the decoded results. It may be reasonable to assume that these
foreign words are phonetically related to the input speech, and
may therefore still be useful when computing phoneme confusions.
Transliteration or romanisation can be used for non-Latin and Latin
script target languages respectively, to convert these to similarly
sounding character sequences in the script of the target language.
A Grapheme-to-Phoneme (G2P) model can supplement the lexicon
for out-of-vocabulary words. Multiple alternative pronunciations can
be considered to improve generalisability, together with prior pro-
nunciation probabilities computed from the G2P model.
This paper proposes to compute per-phoneme phoneme posteriors,
P (ρi|O), from a phoneme-level CN, instead of as (1). A CN [27]–
[29] is a representation of competing decoded hypotheses, which
assumes that the probability of the phoneme at each position along the
sequence is conditionally independent of phonemes at other positions
(a) Mean pool frame-level features per-phoneme, then concatenate with
per-phoneme features
(b) Transformer decoder cross-attention to combine per-phoneme and per-
frame features
Fig. 1: Transformer models for sentence-level speech evaluation
along the sequence. In this way, the probability of the phoneme
sequence can be expressed as
P (ρ|O) ≈
Y
i
P (ρi|O) .
(8)
A CN can be approximated from an N-best list by using approaches
of [27]–[29], with [29] being used in this paper. The CN can be
interpreted to express a conﬁdence in the model’s hypothesis. A
related approach in [30] instead trains a Whisper-based model to
directly predict conﬁdence scores from a given hypothesis.
GOP-like features, referred to as CN-GOP, are computed from the
log-posteriors of the phoneme-level CN,
CN-GOPi = log P

ρi = ρref
i
O

.
(9)
Analogously to (3), a margin between the log-posteriors of the
canonical and most likely phonemes can also be computed as
CN-GOPmargin,i = log P

ρi =ρref
i
O

−max
ρ
log P(ρi =ρ|O).
(10)
Duration normalisation is omitted, to accommodate for the absence
of phoneme time alignments from a frame-asynchronous model.
Analogous LPP and LPR features can also be computed from the
CN.
In summary, the proposed steps to compute the phoneme-level CN
from frame-asynchronous non-phonemic formatted hypotheses are as
follows.
1) Beam-search ASR decoding with the weakly-supervised model
is used to compute an N-best list of formatted hypotheses.
2) The N-best word sequences are then text normalised.
3) Transliteration or romanisation is applied to accommodate for
hypothesised words that are written in a script that differs from
the target language.
4) The N-best list is ﬁltered to remove identical word sequences,
retaining that with the largest posterior.
5) The word sequences are converted to phoneme sequences
through a lexicon.
6) A phoneme-level CN is computed from the phoneme-level N-
best list. This is done by ﬁrst expressing the N-best list as
a phoneme lattice, with branched paths for competing N-best
hypotheses and also branched paths for the alternative pronun-
ciations of each word. The branch scores can be computed
from the N-best posteriors and the G2P pronunciation priors.
The algorithm in [29] is then used to compute a CN from the
lattice.
For read speech, GOP, LPP, and LPR features are computed for
each canonical phoneme. This is computed by ﬁrst ﬁnding a minimum
edit distance alignment between the CN and the canonical phoneme
sequence of the transcript. Each confusion set is categorised as
either an insertion, deletion, or matched with a canonical phoneme.
If matched, then the phoneme posterior can be read off from the
confusion set, and phonemes that are not expressed in the confusion
set are assumed to have zero probability. For a deletion, it is assumed
that all probability is allocated to silence, and thus the non-silence
phonemes are assigned zero probability. Insertions can be ignored,
as GOP, LPP, and LPR features only need to be computed for each
canonical phoneme.
A limitation is that pronunciation scores in the lexicon are priors,
without considering the observed audio. Furthermore, the pronun-
ciation variants present in the lexicon may not adequately capture
idiosyncrasies present in non-native speech.
An alternative to beam-search decoding in step 1 is to instead
generate hypotheses by sampling from the posterior. Initial tests found
that for speechocean762, a high temperature needs to be used to
obtain a set of diverse hypotheses. On the other hand, beam-search
consistently yielded diverse hypotheses without needing to apply a
temperature. Applying a temperature may impact the distribution
expressed in the set of hypotheses with their sentence-level posteriors,
which may then affect the GOP, LPP, and LPR features that are
computed from these. This paper therefore favours using beam-search
decoding over sampling generation.
The model’s frame-asynchronous nature hinders the direct compu-
tation of the SR and ND. However, it is possible to estimate token-
level time alignments through a dynamic time warping on the cross-
attention weights. If the tokens are sub-word units, then word-level
SR and ND features can be computed from these, and used instead
of phoneme-level features.
IV. ALIGNMENT-FREE CROSS-ATTENTION
The speech evaluation models in [4], [6] have inputs with sequence
lengths corresponding to the number of canonical phonemes in the
utterance. Per-frame features extracted from pre-trained SSL models
and pitch can supplement the per-phoneme features. In [4], [6], this
is achieved by mean pooling the per-frame features over the frames
that are aligned to each canonical phoneme. An example of a model
with this feature combination is shown in Fig. 1a.
An absence of a phoneme time alignment hinders the joint usage
of phoneme-level and frame-level features. This paper proposes that a
cross-attention, such as a transformer decoder [31], can allow the joint
usage of phoneme-level and frame-level features, without needing to
supply a time alignment. An example of this is illustrated in Fig. 1b.
The phoneme-level input sequence is used as the query to the cross-
attention, thereby determining the output sequence length, while the
frame-level input sequence is used as both the key and value. This
may allow the model to learn how to associate between phonemes and
frames, thereby learning to align. However, this approach allows each
phoneme position to attend over the entire frame sequence. Learning
from the limited training data about an adequate association of which
frames belong to which canonical phoneme may be difﬁcult. Word
time alignments can be used to restrict each phoneme position to
only attend to frames that are aligned to the word that the phoneme
belongs to. Although such a constraint is less restrictive than using
a phoneme time alignment, it is easier to obtain a word rather than
a phoneme time alignment from Whisper.
V. EXPERIMENTS
A. Setup
Experiments were performed on two language datasets, spee-
chocean762 [32] in English and an internal Tamil dataset that is
also used in [1], [33]. Speechocean762 comprises 2500 sentences
of English read speech from 125 native Mandarin speakers in each
of the train and test sets. The data is annotated with various types
of proﬁciency scores at the phoneme, word, and sentence levels.
The experiments in this paper only consider pronunciation accuracy,
which is annotated by 5 human raters per sentence, along a scale
from 0 to 10 for the sentence and word levels, and from 0 to 2
for the phoneme level. A consensus reference score was obtained
by averaging the scores of the 5 raters, which differs from [32] that
instead uses the median score. The Tamil data comprises 2118 and
2093 sentences in the train and test sets respectively. These were read
speech from 100 speakers from Singapore, between 9 to 16 years old.
The sentence-level pronunciation accuracy was annotated by 4 raters
along a scale from 1 to 5. A consensus reference score was again
computed as the average of the multiple rater scores.
A baseline approach for speech evaluation is to compute GOP, LPP,
LPR, SR, and ND from a frame-synchronous hybrid neural network-
Hidden Markov model [34] ASR model. For speechocean762, this
was trained following the setup in [32]. The acoustic model used
a Time Delay Neural Network (TDNN) [35], and was trained on
the Librispeech 960 hours data [36], following the standard Kaldi
[37] recipe, up to the cross-entropy stage. For Tamil, a lattice-free
[38] hybrid model was trained on 220 hours of internal read closed-
talking speech from 710 adults, previously used in [1], [33]. The
TABLE I: Phoneme pronunciation accuracy of per-phoneme SVRs
trained on GOP, LPP, and LPR from Whisper, using multiple pro-
nunciations and priors
Number of
Pronunciation
PCC↑/ MSE↓for Whisper feature
pronunciations
prior
CN-GOP
CN-GOPmargin
LPP & LPR
1
no
0.24 / 0.95
0.28 / 0.99
0.42 / 0.16
up to 6
no
0.29 / 0.88
0.41 / 0.99
0.48 / 0.15
up to 6
yes
0.27 / 0.92
0.34 / 1.00
0.48 / 0.14
acoustic model interleaved TDNN and long short-term memory layers
[39]. Forced alignment of the speech evaluation data using these ASR
models was used to compute the GOP, LPP, LPR, SR, and ND. SSL
embeddings, PE, and pitch features were also computed, as described
in section II.
The baseline speech evaluation architecture is illustrated in Fig.
1a and is referred to as the phoneme pooling model. The proposed
alignment-free architecture shown in Fig. 1b and described in section
IV is referred to as the cross-attention model. The speech eval-
uation model was trained toward the cross-entropy criterion, with
early stopping measured on a 10% held-out validation set. During
inference, the score was hypothesised as the mean of the discrete
output posterior. Following [32], both the hypothesis and reference
scores were ﬁrst rounded to the closest integers before computing
the Pearson’s Correlation Coefﬁcient (PCC) and Mean Squared Error
(MSE) evaluation metrics.
B. Features from Whisper
The ﬁrst experiment investigates the use of multiple alternative
pronunciations and pronunciation priors when computing the GOP,
LPP, and LPR from Whisper, each on its own without combining with
other features. The speechocean762 test set was used. Whisper-large-
v3 was decoded with a beam size of 200, using English prompted
as the target language. Non-Latin script words were romanised
using Unidecode. The CMU lexicon was used to map words to
phoneme sequences, which contains up to 6 pronunciation variants
for each word. A G2P model from [40] was used to supplement 6
pronunciation variants for each word that was not contained within
the CMU lexicon, and also to compute pronunciation priors. This
initial investigation of the stand-alone quality of the features followed
the baseline setup presented in [32], where per-phoneme Support
Vector Regressors (SVR) [41] were trained on each of the feature
types to compute the phoneme-level pronunciation accuracy.
The results in Table I show that using multiple pronunciations in
the lexicon improves performance, while using pronunciation priors
may not yield further gains. When pronunciation priors were not used,
all pronunciation variants were treated as equally likely. The lack of
beneﬁt of pronunciation priors may be because the priors computed
by the G2P model are independent of the acoustic observation.
Subsequent experiments used multiple pronunciations without priors.
TABLE II: Compare features from hybrid model and Whisper with
different beam sizes, to compute phoneme pronunciation accuracy,
using per-phoneme SVRs
Features
N-best
PCC / MSE for feature
from
size
GOP
GOPmargin
LPP & LPR
hybrid
-
0.28 / 0.60
0.25 / 0.69
0.47 / 0.16
Whisper
10
0.31 / 0.91
0.37 / 0.99
0.49 / 0.17
100
0.30 / 0.90
0.41 / 1.00
0.47 / 0.15
200
0.29 / 0.88
0.41 / 0.99
0.48 / 0.15
The next experiment compares the Whisper-generated features
using different beam sizes, against features computed from a hybrid
TABLE III: Sentence-level pronunciation accuracy of phoneme pool-
ing model on GOP, LPP, and LPR features from Whisper
Features from
GOP type
Use LPP & LPR
PCC
MSE
-
-
no
0.709
1.138
hybrid
GOPmargin
yes
0.753
1.051
Whisper
CN-GOPmargin
yes
0.748
1.042
Whisper
CN-GOP
yes
0.745
1.026
model. Per-phoneme SVRs were again used to model phoneme
pronunciation accuracy. The results in Table II suggest that the feature
quality may be fairly independent of the decoding beam size, with
the only substantial improvement being in the PCC for CN-GOPmargin
when increasing the beam from 10 to 100. It therefore seems
reasonable to use a smaller decoding beam to reduce computational
cost. However, the remaining experiments used a beam size of 200,
as the computation was still feasible with the dataset sizes that were
used. The combination of LPP and LPR features computed from
Whisper performs comparably to those computed from a hybrid
model. For GOPmargin, features extracted from Whisper have better
PCC but worse MSE. The degraded MSE may be due to an interaction
between the sparsity of the CN posteriors and the per-phoneme
modelling of the SVRs.
A phoneme pooling model was then trained using the phoneme-
level GOPmargin, LPP, LPR, SR, ND, and PE features, together
with the frame-level SSL and pitch features. This computed the
sentence-level pronunciation accuracy. Table III compares omitting
the GOP, LPP, and LPR features (top row), as well as replacing these
with features computed from Whisper. Omitting these three features
degrades performance, showing their complementarity to the other
features. Features computed from Whisper perform comparably to
those computed from a hybrid model.
TABLE IV: Inclusion of SR and ND features from Whisper
Use SR and ND
PCC
MSE
no
0.729
1.125
hybrid phoneme level
0.753
1.051
Whisper word level
0.743
1.031
Table IV then investigates using word-level SR and ND features
computed from Whisper alignments, using the same phoneme pooling
model. Each canonical phoneme position was assigned the SR and
ND of the word that the phoneme belonged to. The GOPmargin,
LPP, and LPR features here were computed from a hybrid model.
The results again show that omitting SR and ND features degrades
performance. Using word-level SR and ND computed from a Whisper
alignment performs comparably against using phoneme-level SR and
ND from a hybrid model.
C. Alignment-free cross-attention model
The models used thus far have combined the per-phoneme
GOPmargin, LPP, LPR, SR, ND, and PE features together with the per-
frame SSL and pitch features, by averaging the per-frame features
over the frames that are aligned with each canonical phoneme.
A phoneme time alignment is not easily available from a frame-
asynchronous model that does not explicitly express phonemes, like
Whisper. Section IV proposes a cross-attention approach, that allows
for combination between these features without phoneme time align-
ments. This experiment investigates using this model architecture,
shown in Fig. 1b. The per-phoneme and per-frame features were
separately projected to 24 dimensions. An 8-headed 24-dimensional
TABLE V: Combine per-phoneme and per-frame features either by
averaging over the frames for each phoneme or by using cross-
attention
Features from
Combine features by
PCC
MSE
hybrid
phoneme pooling
0.753
1.051
cross-attention
0.718
1.095
Whisper
cross-attention
0.735
1.051
+ restrict attention to word
0.747
1.027
transformer decoder layer was used to combine these feature pro-
jections. The output of this was then parsed through 2 transformer
encoder layers, followed by sentence-level attention pooling, ReLU
feed-forward, and a softmax output.
The results shown in Table V start from a baseline conﬁguration
of using features from a hybrid model and used the phoneme
pooling architecture. The features were then kept the same, but the
model architecture was replaced with the cross-attention approach.
This yields a performance degradation, suggesting the beneﬁt that a
phoneme time alignment can bring when associating between the per-
frame and per-phoneme features. While still using the cross-attention
architecture, the hybrid model features were replaced with the CN-
GOPmargin, LPP, LPR, and word SR and ND features from Whisper.
This conﬁguration does not need a hybrid model. This performs
similarly to the baseline for MSE, but still has a degraded PCC.
The cross-attention allows each phoneme position to attend over all
frames. Section IV proposes that a word time alignment can be used
to restrict the cross-attention, such that each phoneme only attends
to frames that are aligned to the same word as that phoneme. The
results in the bottom row of Table V suggest that such an attention
constraint may be useful, and brings the performance back to being
more comparable with the baseline. Thus, speech evaluation can be
done without ASR training data.
D. Word-level posteriors
Section III describes how phoneme-level posteriors can be com-
puted from a CN representation of ASR hypotheses. These can
then be used to compute GOP, LPP, and LPR features for speech
evaluation. Analogous posteriors can also be expressed at the word
level, and be used to compute word-level GOP features. These may
be complementary to the phoneme-level features. This experiment
investigates the usefulness of these word-level GOP features.
The following steps were used to compute the features. The 200-
best list from Whisper beam search was text normalised, romanised,
and ﬁltered for repetitions. A word-level CN was then computed from
this N-best list. The CN was aligned with the reference transcription.
For a confusion set that was matched with a reference word, the word
posteriors could be read off the confusion set, with zero probability
assigned to words that were not in the confusion set. For deletions,
all non-silence word probabilities were assumed to be zero. Inser-
tions were again ignored. Analogous word-level GOP-like features,
referred to as CN-WGOP and CN-WGOPmargin were computed from
the word posteriors. As a sanity check, the PCC between CN-
WGOP and the reference word-level pronunciation accuracy on the
speechocean762 test set is 0.477, suggesting a reasonable correlation
with the human-labelled word accuracy.
A baseline setup used a cross-attention model with word time
alignment constrained attention, using phoneme CN-GOPmargin, LPP,
LPR, and word SR and ND features from Whisper, together with
PE, SSL, and pitch. The word-level GOP was then concatenated
to the per-phoneme features, with each phoneme position in the
TABLE VI: Inclusion of word GOP features in cross-attention model
Use word-level GOP
PCC
MSE
no
0.747
1.027
CN-WGOPmargin
0.745
1.040
CN-WGOP
0.737
1.077
TABLE VII: Apply Whisper features and cross-attention model to
low-resource Tamil language
Features from
Combine features by
PCC
MSE
hybrid
phoneme pooling
0.547
0.637
cross-attention
0.611
0.699
Whisper
cross-attention
0.611
0.573
+ restrict attention to word
0.629
0.569
sequence using the GOP of the word that the phoneme belonged
to. Either CN-WGOP or CN-WGOPmargin was used. The sentence-
level pronunciation accuracy results in Table VI suggest that using
CN-WGOPmargin outperforms using CN-WGOP, but both do not yield
performance improvements over the baseline. This suggests that
word-level GOP may not be complementary to the existing phoneme-
level and frame-level features for speech evaluation.
E. Extend speech evaluation to low-resource Tamil language
Using a multi-lingual open-source weakly-supervised model to
compute features and time alignments for speech evaluation alleviates
the need for paired speech-text data, simpliﬁes extending speech
evaluation to new languages supported by the weakly-supervised
model, and may allow speech evaluation applications to beneﬁt from
the latest open-source model releases. The experiments thus far have
considered speech evaluation in English, which is a reasonably high-
resourced language. It is more difﬁcult to obtain large quantities of
diverse paired speech-text data for Tamil, to train an ASR model.
Internal Tamil ASR training data needed to be collected here, because
of the sparsity of open-source alternatives. It is often difﬁcult to
share such internal data, due to privacy constraints. Thus, Tamil is
considered a low-resource language, and the proposal here can be
applied when no Tamil ASR data is available at all. Whisper supports
Tamil ASR, and thus can be used out-of-the-box to generate features
and time alignments for speech evaluation. This section demonstrates
the application of the proposed approach to Tamil speech evaluation.
In the previous experiments on English, hypothesised words from
Whisper that were not in Latin script were text-normalised and
romanised. The Tamil N-best lists were text-normalised to remove
punctuation and convert numbers into spoken form. Open-source
transliteration tools for Tamil as the target script are not as readily
available as romanisation tools for a target with Latin script. As
such, a simpler approach was used for Tamil by omitting N-best
hypotheses that contained non-Tamil characters. The Tamil words
were converted into phoneme sequences using a lexicon obtained
from Babel [42]. This expresses up to 4 pronunciation variants for
each word. A G2P model trained on the Babel lexicon was used to
generate 4 pronunciation variants for hypothesised Tamil words that
were not contained in the Babel lexicon.
The experiment from section V-C is applied to Tamil in Table VII.
This compares a baseline hybrid model features approach and the
proposed approach of computing features and time alignments from
Whisper, on Tamil. As with the previous English experiments, the
baseline approach used GOPmargin, LPP, LPR, SR, ND, and phoneme
forced alignments from the hybrid model. These were combined
with PE, pitch, and SSL features. The pitch and SSL features were
averaged over the frames that were aligned with each canonical
TABLE VIII: Confusion network decoding of Whisper N-best list
N-best size
1-best WER (%)↓
CN decode WER (%)
1 (greedy)
17.40
-
10
16.25
15.66
100
16.18
15.41
200
16.22
15.36
phoneme. The proposed approach used CN-GOPmargin, LPP, LPR,
word-level SR and ND, and word-level time alignments computed
from Whisper. Together with PE, these were combined with pitch and
SSL features using cross-attention. Word posteriors were not used.
The results show that using a cross-attention architecture with
features from a hybrid model improves PCC but degrades MSE,
compared to a phoneme pooling architecture that uses a hybrid
forced alignment. It is thus difﬁcult to conclude how changing the
architecture impacts performance. However, changing the features
to those from Whisper improves both PCC and MSE, compared
to hybrid features with a phoneme pooling model. Restricting the
transformer decoder attention according to the Whisper word time
alignment further improves the performance. This suggests that
on a low-resource language, like Tamil, speech evaluation can be
performed without any need for paired speech-text training data, by
using an easily available multi-lingual open-source ASR model. This
approach not only has comparable performance, but may surpass
the performance of the hybrid baseline. Perhaps, in a low-resource
scenario, it may be beneﬁcial to rely on a multi-lingual open-source
model that was trained on a large quantity of diverse data, rather
than attempting to source for limited target language paired speech-
text data to train an ASR model.
F. Confusion network decoding of Whisper
Throughout this paper, CNs computed from Whisper N-best lists
are repeatedly used to generate features for speech evaluation. With
the availability of these CNs, it seems convenient to assess whether
CN decoding for ASR has any beneﬁt for a large, weakly-supervised,
attention encoder-decoder model like Whisper. Table VIII shows the
Word Error Rate (WER) measured on the speechocean762 test set
when either selecting the top hypothesis from the N-best list or
when ﬁrst computing a CN, and then selecting the top word from
each confusion set. The results suggest that CN decoding consistently
outperforms selecting the 1-best, or top, hypothesis. When selecting
the top hypothesis, increasing the decoding beam size only yields
improvements up to a beam size of 100. For CN decoding, increasing
the beam size continues to yield improvements up to the largest
experimented beam size of 200. This suggests that applying CN
decoding to a large, weakly-supervised model like Whisper may still
be beneﬁcial.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper has considered how to alleviate the reliance of speech
evaluation on expensive target language paired speech-text data to
train a phonemic frame-synchronous ASR model, by relaxing the
requirements to allow the use of more easily obtainable open-
source multi-lingual frame-asynchronous models. Alternative GOP,
SR, and ND features have been proposed without requiring phoneme
time alignments, and instead using CNs. A cross-attention model
architecture has also been proposed to combine between per-phoneme
and per-frame features. The experiments show that these perform
comparably to the hybrid baseline on English speechocean762, and
even outperform the baseline on low-resource Tamil. Thus, speech
evaluation can be done without expensive speech-text data.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Zhang, K. Shi, and N. F. Chen, “Multilingual speech evaluation: case
studies on English, Malay and Tamil,” in Interspeech, Brno, Czechia,
Aug 2021, pp. 4443–4447.
[2] Y. Gong, Z. Chen, I.-H. Chu, P. Chang, and J. Glass, “Transformer-based
multi-aspect multi-granularity non-native English speaker pronunciation
assessment,” in ICASSP, Singapore, May 2022, pp. 7262–7266.
[3] J. H. M. Wong, H. Zhang, and N. F. Chen, “Variations of multi-task
learning for spoken language assessment,”
in Interspeech, Incheon,
South Korea, Sep 2022, pp. 4456–4460.
[4] F.-A. Chao, T.-H. Lo, T.-I. Wu, Y.-T. Sung, and B. Chen,
“3M:
an effective multi-view, multi-granularity, and multi-aspect modeling
approach to English pronunciation assessment,” in APSIPA ASC, Chiang
Mai, Thailand, Nov 2022, pp. 575–582.
[5] J. H. M. Wong, H. Zhang, and N. F. Chen, “Distilling knowledge from
Gaussian process teacher to neural network student,”
in Interspeech,
Dublin, Ireland, Aug 2023, pp. 426–430.
[6] J. H. M. Wong, H. Zhang, and N. F. Chen, “Variational Gaussian process
data uncertainty,” in ASRU, Taipei, Taiwan, Dec 2023.
[7] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, T. Xu, G. Brockman, C. McLeavey, and
I. Sutskever,
“Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak super-
vision,” in ICML, Honolulu, USA, Jul 2023, pp. 28492–28518.
[8] A. Baevski, H. Zhou, A. Mohamed, and M. Auli,
“wav2vec 2.0: a
frameword for self-supervised learning of speech representations,”
in
NeurIPS, Vancouver, Canada, Dec 2020, pp. 12449–12460.
[9] W.-N. Hsu, B. Bolte, Y.-H. H. Tsai, K. Lakhotia, R. Salakhutdinov, and
A. Mohamed, “HuBERT: self-supervised speech representation learning
by masked prediction of hidden units,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, vol. 29, pp. 3451–3460, Oct
2021.
[10] S. Chen, C. Wang, Z. Chen, Y. Wu, S. Liu, Z. Chen, J. Li, N. Kanda,
T. Yoshioka, X. Xiao, J. Wu, L. Zhou, S. Ren, Y. Qian, Y. Qian, J. Wu,
M. Zeng, X. Yu, and F. Wei, “WavLM: large-scale self-supervised pre-
training for full stack speech processing,”
IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1505–1518, Oct 2022.
[11] R. Sennrich, B. Haddow, and A. Birch, “Neural machine translation of
rare words with subword units,” in ACL, Berlin, Germany, Aug 2016,
pp. 1715–1725.
[12] L. Peng, K. Fu, B. Lin, D. Ke, and J. Zhang,
“A study on ﬁne-
tuning wav2vec2.0 model for the task of mispronunciation detection and
diagnosis,” in Interspeech, Brno, Czechia, Aug 2021, pp. 4448–4452.
[13] M. Wu, K. Li, W.-K. Leung, and H. Meng, “Transformer based end-
to-end mispronunciation detection and diagnosis,” in Interspeech, Brno,
Czechia, Aug 2021, pp. 3954–3958.
[14] X. Xu, Y. Kang, S. Cao, B. Lin, and L. Ma, “Explore wav2vec 2.0 for
mispronunciation detection,” in Interspeech, Brno, Czechia, Aug 2021,
pp. 4428–4432.
[15] S. Bann`o and M. Matassoni,
“Proﬁciency assessment of L2 spoken
English using wav2vec 2.0,” in SLT, Doha, Qatar, Jan 2023, pp. 1088–
1095.
[16] S. Bann`o, K. M. Knill, M. Matassoni, V. Raina, and M. J. F. Gales,
“Assessment of L2 oral proﬁciency using self-supervised speech repre-
sentation learning,” in SLaTE, Dublin, Ireland, Aug 2023, pp. 126–130.
[17] E. Kim, J.-J. Jeon, H. Seo, and H. Kim,
“Automatic pronunciation
assessment using self-supervised speech representation learning,”
in
Interspeech, Incheon, South Korea, Sep 2022, pp. 1411–1415.
[18] H. Liu, M. Shi, and Y. Wang,
“Zero-shot automatic pronunciation
assessment,” in Interspeech, Dublin, Ireland, Aug 2023, pp. 1009–1013.
[19] Y. Liang, K. Song, S. Mao, H. Jiang, L. Qiu, Y. Yang, D. Li, L. Xu, and
L. Qiu, “End-to-end word-level pronunciation assessment with MASK
pre-training,” in Interspeech, Dublin, Ireland, Aug 2023, pp. 969–973.
[20] Y. Wang, Z. Wu, J. Nese, A. Kamata, V. Nilabh, and E. C. Larson, “Im-
proving oral reading ﬂuency assessment through sub-sequence matching
of acoustic word embeddings,” in ICASSP, Seoul, South Korea, Apr
2024, pp. 10766–10770.
[21] A. Conneau, A. Baevski, R. Collobert, A. Mohamed, and M. Auli, “Un-
supervised cross-lingual representation learning for speech recognition,”
in Interspeech, Brno, Czechia, Aug 2021, pp. 2426–2430.
[22] W. Hu, Y. Qian, F. K. Soong, and Y. Wang, “Improved mispronunciation
detection with deep neural network trained acoustic models and transfer
learning based logistic regression classiﬁers,” Speech Communication,
vol. 67, pp. 154–166, Mar 2015.
[23] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efﬁcient estimation of
word representations in vector space,” in ICLR, Scottsdale, USA, May
2013.
[24] P. Ghahremani, B. BabaAli, D. Povey, K. Riedhammer, J. Trmal, and
S. Khudanpur, “A pitch extraction algorithm tuned for automatic speech
recognition,” in ICASSP, Florence, Italy, May 2014, pp. 2494–2498.
[25] W. Chan, N. Jaitly, Q. Le, and O. Vinyals, “Listen, attend and spell: a
neural network for large vocabulary conversational speech recognition,”
in ICASSP, Shanghai, China, Mar 2016, pp. 4960–4964.
[26] R. Ma, M. Qian, M. J. F. Gales, and K. M. Knill, “Adapting an ASR
foundation model for spoken language assessment,” in SLaTE, Dublin,
Ireland, Aug 2023, pp. 104–108.
[27] L. Mangu, E. Brill, and A. Stolcke,
“Finding consensus in speech
recognition: word error minimization and other applications of confusion
networks,” Computer Speech and Language, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 373–400,
Oct 2000.
[28] G. Evermann and P. C. Woodland,
“Large vocabulary decoding and
conﬁdence estimation using word posterior probabilities,” in ICASSP,
Istanbul, Turkey, Jun 2000, pp. 1655–1658.
[29] H. Xu, D. Povey, L. Mangu, and J. Zhu,
“Minimum Bayes risk
decoding and system combination based on a recursion for edit distance,”
Computer Speech and Language, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 802–828, Oct 2011.
[30] V. Aggarwal, S. S. Nair, Y. Verma, and Y. Jogi, “Adopting Whisper for
conﬁdence estimation,” in ICASSP, Hyderabad, India, Apr 2025.
[31] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in NIPS, Long
Beach, USA, Dec 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[32] J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Yan, Q. Song, Y. Huang, K. Li,
D. Povey, and Y. Wang, “speechocean762: an open-source non-native
English speech corpus for pronunciation assessment,” in Interspeech,
Brno, Czechia, Aug 2021, pp. 3710–3714.
[33] J. H. M. Wong, H. Zhang, and N. F. Chen,
“Modelling inter-rater
uncertainty in spoken language assessment,” IEEE/ACM Transactions
on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, vol. 31, pp. 2886–2898,
Jul 2023.
[34] H. A. Bourlard and N. Morgan, Connectionist speech recognition: a
hybrid approach, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1994.
[35] A. Waibel, T. Hanazawa, G. E. Hinton, K. Shikano, and K. J. Lang,
“Phoneme recognition using time-delay neural networks,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, vol. 37, no. 3, pp.
328–339, Mar 1989.
[36] V. Panayotov, G. Chen, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “Librispeech: an
ASR corpus based on public domain audio books,” in ICASSP, Brisbane,
Australia, Apr 2015, pp. 5206–5210.
[37] D. Povey, A. Ghoshal, G. Boulianne, L. Burget, O. Glembek, N. Goel,
M. Hannemann, P. Motl´ıˇcek, Y. Qian, P. Schwarz, J. Silovsk´y, G. Stem-
mer, and K. Vesel´y, “The Kaldi speech recognition toolkit,” in ASRU,
Hawaii, USA, Dec 2011.
[38] D. Povey, V. Peddinti, D. Galvez, P. Ghahremani, V. Manohar, X. Na,
Y. Wang, and S. Khudanpur, “Purely sequence-trained neural networks
for ASR based on lattice-free MMI,”
in Interspeech, San Francisco,
USA, Sep 2016, pp. 2751–2755.
[39] V. Peddinti, Y. Wang, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur,
“Low latency
acoustic modeling using temporal convolution and LSTMs,” IEEE Signal
Processing Letters, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 373–377, Mar 2018.
[40] J. R. Novak, N. Minematsu, and K. Hirose,
“Phonetisaurus: explor-
ing grapheme-to-phoneme conversion with joint n-gram models in the
WFST framework,” Natural Language Engineering, vol. 22, no. 6, pp.
907–938, Nov 2016.
[41] H. Drucker, C. J. C. Burges, L. Kaufman, A. Smola, and V. Vapnik,
“Support vector regression machines,” in NIPS, Denver, USA, Dec 1996,
pp. 155–161.
[42] M.
P.
Harper,
“IARPA
babel
program,”
http://www.iarpa.gov/index.php/research-programs/babel, 2011.
