Design Once, Deploy at Scale: Template-Driven ML
Development for Large Model Ecosystems
Jiang Liu, John Martabano Landy, Yao Xuan, Swamy Muddu, Nhat Le, Munaf Sahaf, Luc Kien Hang,
Rupinder Khandpour, Kevin De Angeli, Chang Yang, Shouyuan Chen, Shiblee Sadik, Ani Agrawal, Djordje
Gligorijevic, Jingzheng Qin, Peggy Yao, Alireza Vahdatpour
Meta AI, Menlo Park, California, USA
Modern computational advertising platforms typically rely on recommendation systems to predict
user responses, such as click-through rates, conversion rates, and other optimization events. To
support a wide variety of product surfaces and advertiser goals, these platforms frequently maintain
an extensive ecosystem of machine learning (ML) models. However, operating at this scale creates
significant development and efficiency challenges. Substantial engineering effort is required to regularly
refresh ML models and propagate new techniques, which results in long latencies when deploying ML
innovations across the ecosystem.
We present a large-scale empirical study comparing model performance, efficiency, and ML technique
propagation between a standardized model-building approach and independent per-model optimization
in recommendation systems. To facilitate this standardization, we propose the Standard Model
Template (SMT)—a framework that generates high-performance models adaptable to diverse data
distributions and optimization events. By utilizing standardized, composable ML model components,
SMT reduces technique propagation complexity from O(n · 2k) to O(n + k) where n is the number of
models and k the number of techniques.
Evaluating an extensive suite of models over four global development cycles within Meta’s production
ads ranking ecosystem, our results demonstrate: (1) a 0.63% average improvement in cross-entropy
at neutral serving capacity, (2) a 92% reduction in per-model iteration engineering time, and (3) a
6.3× increase in technique-model pair adoption throughput. These findings challenge the conventional
wisdom that diverse optimization goals inherently require diversified ML model design.
Date: March 27, 2026
Correspondence: jiangliu,johnlandy,yxuan,gligorijevic@meta.com
Summary of Results
• 0.63% average offline performance improvement over independently optimized baselines
• 0.86% cumulative online lift
• 92% reduction in per-model engineering effort
• 6.3× technique propagation throughput
1
Introduction
Deep learning recommendation systems are ubiquitous in computational advertising. They leverage user and
advertiser data to predict response events (e.g. clicks, conversions, likes, follows) and relevance, ultimately
optimizing auction outcomes He et al. (2014); Naumov et al. (2019); Covington et al. (2016); Zhang et al.
(2022, 2024a); Gligorijevic et al. (2020). Furthermore, these systems must operate across diverse modalities,
platforms (e.g. web, mobile), and constraints (e.g. latency restrictions from diverse serving hardware, data
restrictions), requiring them to capture a wide variety of complex data distributions.
This environment necessitates creation of a large fleet of production recommendation models, where each is
1
arXiv:2603.24963v1  [cs.AI]  26 Mar 2026
Figure 1 The conventional model iteration process at Meta. For n models and k candidate techniques, this per-
model development cycle yields an O(n · 2k) search complexity. For each model, engineers conduct trial-and-error
hyperparameter optimization across all k techniques, isolate the subset that improves performance, and evaluate all
possible combinations of these techniques (up to 2k) before selecting the final candidate for deployment.
individually configured with custom architectures, feature engineering pipelines, and training and serving
platform design and hyperparameter settings.
This model diversity compounds over time as engineers
continuously and independently optimize individual models through trial-and-error experimentation.
The ensuing productionization process requires a customized application, tuning, and combination building
process for every model Mi and Machine Learning (ML) technique Tj (Figure 1). Given n models and k
candidate ML techniques, the design space for each model encompasses all 2k possible technique combinations.
This creates a combinatorial explosion with an overall search space complexity of O(n · 2k). Furthermore,
because any new technique Tj targeting a specific model type Mi must first be validated for compatibility
with the model’s existing technique pool, shipping incremental techniques becomes progressively harder over
time. Thus, we face a challenge reducing the latency and computational resources required to ship new ML
techniques across such a wide array of model types.
Additionally, evolving business needs, including new serving hardware and platform transitions, often require
large-scale model migrations. These events magnify the inefficiencies of an independently optimized model-
building approach. Therefore, we must address a critical challenge: developing an ML model design robust
enough to handle the wide variety of data distributions and optimization events that currently fragment the
ecosystem.
To address these challenges, through architectural standardization, we propose the Standard Model Template
(SMT). Instead of relying on model-specific configurations, we construct a small set of six reusable templates
that instantiate across the entire model fleet. These templates are differentiated by model paradigm (e.g.
two-tower vs. single-tower, early-stage efficiency vs. late-stage performance) and feature interaction type.
Based on this framework, we define two distinct processes:
• Template Iteration. ML innovations are evaluated at the template level on a representative subset of models,
then encoded into a shared template.
• Model Iteration. Individual models are instantiated directly from these templates using model-specific inputs,
requiring no further architectural customization.
By decoupling these two processes through a template-based approach, we successfully reduce the development
complexity from O(n · 2k) to O(n + k). New techniques are first validated sequentially at the template level
2
(O(k)) and subsequently deployed to all models via the standard template (O(n)).
This paper makes four main contributions:
(1) Standardized ML Model. A modular template design that accommodates diverse data distributions and
optimization events through standardized, composable components (Section 3.1).
(2) Multi-Model Optimization (MMO). A technique generalization framework leveraging Bayesian optimization
across representative models to find globally-optimal hyperparameter configurations (Section 3.2).
(3) Deployment Methodology. An end-to-end workflow for template based model iteration that reduces
per-model engineering effort by 92% (Section 3.3)
(4) Empirical Validation. A study across four iteration cycles and a large number of models demonstrating
0.63% average performance improvement, 0.86% cumulative online lift, and 6.3× throughput in technique
adoption (Sections 4-5).
2
Related Work
Although the problem of building and iterating on ML templates is novel, our approach draws on prior work
in the AutoML field and shares design principles with libraries found in advanced ML systems across industry.
AutoML and Neural Architecture Search. While AutoML systems reduce manual effort in model develop-
ment Zhang et al. (2025); Yin et al. (2024); Wen et al. (2024b); Chen et al. (2022a,b); Hutter et al. (2019);
Golovin et al. (2017); Feurer et al. (2015), Neural Architecture Search (NAS) automates the exploration
of architectural designs Zhang et al. (2024b); Wen et al. (2024a); Zoph and Le (2016); Liu et al. (2018).
Unlike these traditional approaches, which optimize models individually, SMT standardizes entire fleets of ML
models. In our framework, AutoML is specifically leveraged for template parameter tuning, complementing
human-designed architectures built upon accumulated domain expertise.
Industrial ML Platforms. Large-scale systems such as Google’s TFX Baylor et al. (2017), Uber’s Michelan-
gelo Hermann (2017), and Meta’s FBLearner Hazelwood et al. (2018) primarily address workflow orchestration,
training infrastructure, and deployment. These platforms operate below the abstraction level of SMT, which
defines the standardized ML model layer sitting directly atop this foundational infrastructure.
Recommender Models Research. Prior research in recommendation systems has primarily focused on devel-
oping novel architectures for individual models, such as DLRM Naumov et al. (2019), DCNv1 Wang et al.
(2017)/v2 Wang et al. (2021), DHEN Zhang et al. (2022), and Wukong Zhang et al. (2024a), as well as those
designed to capture advanced sequential features, like HSTU Zhai et al. (2024) and Interformer Zeng et al.
(2025). Rather than proposing a single new ML model design, SMT provides a comprehensive framework to
efficiently ML innovations including these diverse techniques across a massive fleet of models.
3
Methodology
3.1
Fragmented Model Iteration
The model iteration process prior to or without SMT involves n models Mi ∈M, each of which can be
iteratively improved by k candidate ML techniques Tj ∈T . When a new technique is developed, the objective
is to deploy it across all applicable models to maximize aggregate performance improvement. This requires
evaluating the proposed technique against each model’s baseline model and including it in the subsequent
deployment only if detectable improvement is observed.
In this non-standardized paradigm, every model is iterated and tested independently. This necessitates n
separate processes, each conditionally evaluating all possible technique combinations, yielding an intractable
O(n · 2k) search complexity (Figure 1). While engineers use heuristics to avoid exhaustive O(n · 2k) search,
the operational complexity empirically remains significantly higher than O(n · k) per cycle. Consequently,
propagating new ML innovations fleet-wide becomes practically impossible, frequently leaving many models
without access to the latest advancements. The complexity of this non-standardized approach motivated the
development of the Standardized Model Template (SMT). Specifically, we cover the template design, the
template iteration, and the model iteration in detail below.
3
Figure 2 The template defines a modular, layered architecture, standardizing components from feature selection and
representation across different feature types (numerical, categorical, embedding, sequence, etc.), through feature
interaction, to prediction. Components at each layer have standardized interfaces allowing composition and substitution,
enabling template evolution as state-of-the-art changes.
3.2
Standard Template Overview
SMT introduces a layer of model design abstraction by packaging state-of-the-art ML techniques as modular
components, validated through rigorous generalization studies (illustrated in Figure 2). Each template consists
of fixed components (architecture, features, data, training, and serving) alongside variable inputs (data
pipelines, optimization tasks, and serving constraints) that are tailored to each specific model. Models are
then instantiated directly from these components and variables. This approach facilitates efficient tuning
within a significantly reduced search space, bounded by strict, shippable performance criteria.
3.2.1
Template Components
Architecture Template.
The template encompasses a curated set of rigorously defined architectures, each
tailored to fill a specific use case. We categorize these templates based on model paradigm (single-tower,
two-tower) and feature interaction type, as each excels within different model size ranges (Table 1). The
templates provide comprehensive coverage across the suite of ranking and retrieval models (Figure 3). Inputs
to the chosen architectural template include a handful scaling- and optimization-focused parameters, such as
the embedding dimension and the number of feature interaction layers determined at template creation stage.
4
Paradigm
Scale Variants
Use Case
SparseNN
Small, Medium, Large
Final stage ranking
Decoupled SparseNN
Small, Medium, Large
Early stage ranking
Table 1 SMT supports both single-tower and two-tower architectures of varying sizes to support a wide array of use
cases and model sizes across ranking and retrieval stages.
Figure 3 The Small, Medium, and Large templates provide comprehensive coverage across a wide variety of ranking
and retrieval models across a wide range of model FLOPs.
Feature Template.
The template incorporates advanced feature selection and optimization logic. For selection,
we leverage the top K features across specified types (numeric, ID, embedding, transform, event, and others)
based on previously calculated feature importance scores. Furthermore, the template automatically refines
these features using techniques such as position-weighted pooling and specialized modules.
Data Template.
The template provides configurations to enable optimizations within the data pipeline,
including label transformations, the use of features as labels, data enrichment, and sampling.
Training and Serving Template.
The template facilitates decoupled training and serving side configurations.
This includes advanced model parameter distribution strategies such as Data Parallel (DP), Fully Sharded Data
Parallel (FSDP) Zhao et al. (2023), Hybrid Sharded Data Parallel Zhang et al. (2022), and column-wise sharded
embeddings Mudigere et al. (2021). Additionally, it manages dataset selection, optimizer configurations,
hardware capacity allocations, and the specific cluster topologies required for both training and serving
environments.
3.2.2
Template Inputs
The template exposes a set of configurable hyperparameters for model adaptation and tuning, which fall into
two broad categories:
• Model-Specific Inputs. Parameters that define each individual model, such as its optimization events, data
pipelines, available features, and serving constraints.
• Model-Specific Hyperparameters. We observe that certain hyperparameters exhibit high variance when
optimized independently across diverse models, indicating the value of leaving them exposed on a per-model
basis. These hyperparameters define a constrained search space that is highly likely to improve model
performance, enabling efficient template-to-model tuning.
5
Figure 4 Ranking and retrieval models are clustered according to model attributes (R6). The elbow method is used to
select the optimal number of clusters, and each cluster’s center-most point is included in our representative set. The
figure shows 20 clusters being projected into 2 dimensions showing the clear segmentation of the model space that can
be served by templates.
3.3
Standard Template Iteration
We define template iteration as the process of incrementally enhancing the SMT framework with novel ML
innovations. This centralized updating mechanism is critical to SMT’s strong performance, enabling us to
propagate a new ML technique across all instantiated models through a single implementation within the
template.
3.3.1
Representative Model Set.
We establish a representative model set MR to jointly evaluate each ML innovation. We define the model
space M ∈R6 across six dimensions:
1. Ranking stage. retrieval, pre-ranking, ranking
2. Model size. FLOPs at inference
3. Inference hardware. CPU, GPU, MTIA Meta AI (2026)
4. Optimization event. CTR, CVR, quality, value, . . .
5. Product surface. feed, posts, search, reels, . . .
6. Data constraints. full data, restricted, regional
Because M contains a large number of models, exhaustive evaluation is computationally prohibitive. Instead,
we choose a smaller set of representative models to serve as the testbed for evaluating new ML techniques.
We apply k-means clustering with the elbow method to identify the optimal number of clusters given the
distribution of eligible models, then select each cluster’s centroid as a representative, ensuring a minimal yet
diverse sample of models. With our current model space, this yields |MR| ≈20 models. Figure 4 visualizes
the clusters projected into 2 dimensions.
3.3.2
Technique Generalization
We define technique generalization as the process by which we derive fixed hyperparameters θh for a technique
Tj which allow the technique to perform positively across a diverse set of ML models. Below, we cover the
6
technical process to achieve this generalization for eligible ML techniques.
Let T = {T1, T2, . . . , Tk} denote the set of candidate ML techniques, and let MR ⊆M denote the representa-
tive model set. Table 2 summarizes the key symbols.
Symbol
Description
Tj ∈T
The j-th candidate ML technique
Mi ∈MR
The i-th model in the representative set
θh
A hyperparameter configuration for technique Tj
P base
i
∈R
Baseline performance of model Mi (higher = better)
Pi,j,h ∈R
Performance of Mi with technique Tj and hyperparameter config θh
∆i,j,h
Performance Delta: Pi,j,h −P base
i
wi
Importance weight for model Mi, with P
i wi = 1
α
Significance threshold (default: 0.05%)
ε
Maximum allowable regression rate (default: 0.1)
τ
Minimum aggregate improvement for inclusion (default: 0.05%)
Aj,h
Aggregate Performance Delta across representative model set
Table 2 Notation for technique generalization.
Individual Performance Delta. Let P base
i
and Pi,j,h denote the performance of model Mi at baseline and after
applying technique Tj with configuration θh, respectively, where higher values indicate better performance.
The per-model Performance Delta achieved by applying the technique is:
∆i,j,h = Pi,j,h −P base
i
.
(1)
A positive value of ∆i,j,h indicates that the technique improved the model, while a negative value indicates
regression.
Regression Rate. A model is considered to regress under a technique if applying the technique causes a
significant performance degradation (i.e., the magnitude of the negative performance delta exceeds a threshold
α). We define the regression rate Rj,h of a technique Tj (with θh hyperparameters) as the proportion of
representative models that regress:
Rj,h =
1
|MR|
|MR|
X
i=1
1{∆i,j,h<−α},
(2)
where 1{·} is the indicator function. The regression rate measures how well a technique generalizes across the
model space; as such, it is primarily determined by the technique’s performance and the number of evaluated
models, rather than traffic or revenue.
Aggregate Performance Delta. To summarize the overall benefit of a technique on the representative model set,
we first compute a weighted average of individual improvements:
µj(θh) =
|MR|
X
i=1
wi∆i,j,h,
X
i
wi = 1,
(3)
where wi reflects the operational priority of model Mi (e.g., traffic volume). A positive µj(θh) indicates the
technique with the hyperparameter combination boosts the model fleet’s performance.
We define the Aggregate Performance Delta with a penalty on regression rate above a threshold ε:
Aj,h =
(
µj(θh)
if Rj,h ≤ε
−∞
otherwise.
(4)
7
Figure 5 Multi-Model Optimization (MMO): ML techniques are jointly optimized across multiple representative models
using Bayesian Optimization for hyperparameter tuning and aggregation of metrics across models, producing an
optimal set of hyperparameters θh.
Technique-hyperparameter combinations causing excessive regression (Rj,h > ε) are penalized by assigning a
value of −∞. Here we set ε = 0.1 (at most 10% of models may regress) and α = 0.05%.
Hyperparameter Optimization. For each technique Tj ∈T , we employ Monte Carlo Bayesian Optimization Ba-
landat et al. (2020) to efficiently find the hyperparameter configuration which maximizes the Aggregate
Performance Delta:
θ∗
h = arg max
θh Aj,h.
(5)
We denote the optimal performance of a technique as: P ∗
j = Aj,h∗. Finally, we define T +
G ⊆T as the set of
generalized techniques whose performance measurably improved the representative models MR in aggregate,
T +
G =
n
Tj ∈T
: P ∗
j ≥α
o
.
(6)
We refer to the entire above process as Multi-Model Optimization (MMO), illustrated in Figure 5 and
Algorithm 1.
After optimization yields θ∗
j for each technique Tj, two analyses are performed before template integration.
Holdout Validation. We evaluate T +
G and θ∗
j on a held-out set MH ⊂M \ MR to guard against overfitting
and verify that performance transfers to the broader model fleet.
Sensitivity Analysis for Parameter Exposure. We determine which hyperparameters should be standardized (fixed
in the template) versus exposed (left tunable per model). Let θh = (θh,1, . . . , θh,d) denote the d-dimensional
configuration. Restricting to feasible trials (those with Rj,h ≤ε), we fit a first-order surrogate:
µj(θh) ≈β0 +
d
X
k=1
βk θh,k
(7)
The coefficient βk quantifies global sensitivity. To measure cross-model disagreement, we fit the same model
per model Mi, obtaining per-model coefficients βi,k, and compute σ2
k = Vari[βi,k]. A hyperparameter is
standardized when |βk| is small (low global sensitivity) and σ2
k is small (models agree on its effect). It is
exposed when either quantity is large, indicating model-specific tuning is warranted.
Template Integration. Once we have generalized and evaluated each of the techniques across the representative
model set, we can proceed to encode these techniques into our standard templates. We leverage the modularized
design of the template to implement techniques Tj ∈T +
G in an efficient manner. We follow this encoding with
8
Algorithm 1 Multi-Model Optimization (MMO)
Require: Techniques T , representative models MR, weights {wi}, thresholds α, ε, τ, iterations N
Ensure: Generalized set T +
G with optimal configurations {θ∗
h}
1: T +
G ←∅
2: for each technique Tj ∈T do
3:
Initialize Bayesian optimizer over hyperparameter space
4:
for t = 1 to N do
5:
Sample θ(t)
h
via acquisition function
6:
for each model Mi ∈MR do
7:
Evaluate Pi,j,h(t)
8:
Compute ∆i,j,h(t) ←Pi,j,h(t) −P base
i
9:
end for
10:
Compute Rj,h(t) via Eq. (2)
11:
Compute µj(θ(t)
h ) via Eq. (3)
12:
Compute Aj,h(t) via Eq. (4)
13:
Update surrogate model with (θ(t)
h , Aj,h(t))
14:
end for
15:
θ∗
h ←arg maxθh∈{θ(1)
h
,...,θ(N)
h
} Aj,h
16:
P ∗
j ←Aj,h∗
17:
if P ∗
j ≥τ then
18:
T +
G ←T +
G ∪{Tj}
19:
end if
20: end for
21: return T +
G , {θ∗
h : Tj ∈T +
G }
a back-test to validate the performance and/or efficiency wins from all new techniques Tj ∈T +
G in the new
template version. Through four cycles of development, we have shipped 80 new ML techniques across each of
the templates.
Figure 6 During template iteration, eligible techniques undergo Multi-Model Optimization. Techniques that meet the
specified selection criteria are codified into the Standard Model Template, and template versioning is utilized to ensure
backward compatibility.
3.4
Standard Model Iteration
We define model iteration as the end-to-end process of designing, building, testing, and deploying new models
to serve production traffic. Here we outline the advantages that standardization provides during the model
iteration.
By enforcing a homogeneous model space, SMT enables the decoupling of Template Iteration (Figure 6)
from Model Iteration (Figure 7). As detailed previously, Template Iteration leverages MMO to concurrently
evaluate k techniques across the representative model set MR. By aggregating performance metrics, this
9
Figure7 The model iteration process in a standardized environment. By eliminating the need for per-model customization,
each model simply instantiates the latest template version to seamlessly incorporate a suite of previously generalized
ML techniques.
process converges on a globally optimal hyperparameter configuration, effectively completing the design phase
and advancing the template from version vx to vx+1.
In the subsequent model iteration, we use template version vx+1 to directly apply these k techniques to all
n models Mi ∈M. Decoupling these steps slashes the operational complexity to O(n + k), driving major
efficiency wins (Figure 7). Additionally, this architectural standardization ensures that the performance gains
of each technique Tj ∈T are highly consistent and transferable across the standardized model set.
4
Experimental Design
To validate the SMT framework, we conducted a large-scale empirical study across Meta’s ranking and
retrieval ecosystem. This section details the primary hypotheses guiding our evaluation and outlines the
experimental setup used to measure both model performance and engineering throughput.
4.1
Hypotheses.
We evaluate two primary hypotheses:
• H1: Performance. A standardized template can match or exceed the offline and online performance of an
independently optimized model across diverse data distributions and optimization goals.
• H2: Efficiency. Template-based development significantly reduces per-model iteration engineering effort and
increases technique propagation throughput.
4.2
Experimental Setup
Our evaluation spans four development cycles, each comprising a variable number of iterations per model,
to compare SMT against the existing, independently optimized model-building paradigm. Collectively, this
dataset encompasses ≥50% of the models within the ranking and retrieval ecosystem. The baseline for
comparison is each model’s bespoke configuration currently used in production. For every migrated model, we
measure the following:
• Offline performance. Normalized Entropy (NE) He et al. (2014), defined as the cross-entropy loss normalized
by the entropy of the training data’s background event rate. An NE improvement of ≥0.05% is typically
considered statistically significant. 1
1Lower values of Normalized Entropy (NE) signify stronger performance. However, to improve readability in this paper, we
denote performance improvements as a positive percentage NE delta.
10
• Online performance. Primary business metrics measured during live-traffic A/B tests.
• Engineering effort. The number of engineering hours spent per model iteration, quantified via internal
time-tracking.
• Throughput. The total number of successful ⟨technique, model⟩pairs shipped to production.
5
Results
In this section, we present the empirical findings from deploying the SMT framework across our production
fleet.
We evaluate these results against our primary hypotheses, beginning with an analysis of offline
performance gains and online A/B test validations. Subsequently, we quantify the operational impact of
the framework, detailing the significant reductions in engineering effort and the acceleration of technique
propagation throughput.
5.1
Offline Performance Improvement
Across four development cycles, SMT achieves an average NE improvement of 0.63% at neutral serving
capacity (Table 3). The Model Share (%) metric indicates the percentage of studied models relative to the
entire ranking and retrieval ecosystem, a growth driven by organic adoption. We observe that performance
improvements accelerate over time as the templates mature; we hypothesize that later adopters inherit a richer
baseline of performance because of the continuous accumulation of generalized ML techniques in the template.
Period
Model Share (%)
Mean NE (%)
Max NE (%)
Cycle 1
14.2
0.36
0.95
Cycle 2
20.1
0.56
1.12
Cycle 3
19.8
0.68
1.38
Cycle 4
29.4
0.78
1.94
Total
51.8
0.63
1.94
Table 3 Offline performance improvement measured across four development cycles indicates cumulative average NE
improvement of 0.63% with consistent improvement across 51.8% of models in the production ecosystem.
5.2
Online A/B Test Results
Over the course of four half-year cycles and an extensive number of production launches, we observe that offline
NE improvements consistently translated to online gains across primary business metrics, demonstrating the
template’s substantial real-world value. Table 4 summarizes the A/B test results for SMT-powered technique
launches across these development cycles. 2
Period
Model Share (%)
Online Lift (%)
Cycle 1
14.2
0.11
Cycle 2
20.1
0.19
Cycle 3
19.8
0.27
Cycle 4
29.4
0.29
Total
51.8
0.86
Table 4 Online metric lift is consistent and increasing across cycles, totaling 0.86% across 4 such development cycles.
5.3
Efficiency Improvement
SMT reduces the engineering effort required for offline model iteration by 92% compared to the traditional
fragmented model iteration excluding effort on data preparation, but including any other optimization-related
and model serving efforts. We attribute this large efficiency gain to two key mechanisms:
2Online metrics represent the aggregate impact of technique propagation via SMT; online metrics for individual models vary.
11
• “Solve Once” Principle. In a standardized paradigm, architectural bugs or pipeline issues only need to be
resolved once at the template level. This effectively amortizes the cost of issue resolution across the entire
fleet of models under development.
• Extensive Automation. Standardization inherently yields predictable model behavior. Consequently, au-
tomating the model-building pipeline has higher reliability and reduced friction compared to managing
bespoke, independently optimized models.
5.4
Throughput Improvement
As a direct result of the 92% reduction in engineering hours per offline model iteration (e.g., data refresh,
feature/architecture/training/serving optimization, and ML technique onboarding), SMT achieves a 6.3×
increase in technique propagation throughput compared to traditional, independently optimized approaches
(Table 5). This surge is primarily driven by a 5× increase in the number of models iterated, which we attribute
to the dramatically lowered engineering barrier, allowing innovations to reach a much broader pool of models.
Metric
SMT
Custom
Techniques shipped per model (average)
1.26X
X
Models reached per cycle (average)
5Y
Y
Total (technique, model) pairs
6.3XY
XY
Table 5 Technique propagation throughput. SMT demonstrates a 6.3× increase in total ⟨technique, model⟩pairs
shipped compared to independently optimized baselines. This surge is largely attributable to a 5× increase in the
number of models iterated.
6
Analysis
Having established the empirical success of the Standard Model Template (SMT) framework, we now present
the underlying mechanics driving these results. This section analyzes the architectural and operational factors
that enable standardized templates to consistently outperform bespoke, independently optimized production
models under the continuous active development, while simultaneously reducing engineering overhead.
6.1
Why Standardization Outperforms Independent Optimization
Counterintuitively, we see that standardization outperforms independent optimization in model building. We
will discuss our hypotheses for this improvement below:
1. Innovation Compounding.
Templates continuously accumulate improvements in the form of new ML
techniques generalized during cyclic template iteration. Consequently, any model instantiated from the
template immediately inherits a rich, collective history of previously generalized ML techniques.
2. Escape from Local Optima. Years of isolated, per-model optimization often yield rigid configurations bound
by outdated historical constraints. Engineers prioritize integrating new techniques over deprecating obsolete
ones, yielding bloated model designs. Conversely, templates are continuously re-evaluated using validated
best practices, preventing such bloat.
3. Design Once, Deploy at Scale. A shared template serving 50 models receives 50× more production exposure
than a single custom configuration. This massive scale ensures edge cases surface rapidly, allowing a single
fix to immediately benefit the entire global model pool. In contrast, under an independent optimization
paradigm, identical issues are either debugged repeatedly across different teams or left entirely unresolved
in lower-priority models.
6.2
Lessons for Practitioners
Based on four cycles of production deployment, we distill the following actionable insights for organizations
managing large-scale model fleets:
12
1. Target ∼70% adoption, not 100%. Diminishing returns dictate that migrating the final ∼30% of models
is rarely worth the required engineering effort. Accept that bespoke customization will always exist,
as researchers require certain models to serve as experimental testbeds for new ideas before fleet-wide
generalization can be considered.
2. Focus on template quality. A single engineer-week spent improving a template can save ∼100 engineer-weeks
across the fleet. Investing in robust infrastructure to support the seamless and reliable execution of
templates is paramount.
3. Apply the “Solve Once” principle rigorously. Every technical challenge must be resolved at the template level.
Generalized solutions enable frictionless scalability across a diverse range of models. Solving identical
problems on a per-model basis indicates a fundamental failure of abstraction.
4. Use representative model clustering. In large model ecosystems, it is computationally impractical to test
new ML techniques against every model. Prioritize identifying a minimal, diverse set of representative
models that capture the critical aspects of fleet diversity, and leverage this cluster to efficiently assess the
generalizability of new techniques.
5. Track regression rate, not just average performance gain. When operating at scale, engineers lack the
bandwidth to run per-technique ablation studies during model deployment. Therefore, when evaluating
techniques during Template Iteration, minimizing the regression rate is often more critical than maximizing
the absolute performance gain. A technique with a 5% median gain but a 20% regression rate introduces
more systemic risk than one with a 2% gain and a 2% regression rate. Consistency is the foundation of
fleet-wide deployment.
6.3
Limitations
While the SMT framework delivers substantial improvements in both performance and engineering efficiency,
our deployment revealed several practical bounds to fleet-wide standardization.
6.3.1
Models That Resisted Standardization
Despite high success rates across the ecosystem, a small subset of models—approximately 5.6% (14 of
252)—exhibited poor performance and struggled to converge when migrated to the template. While rigorous
analysis has yet to isolate a definitive root cause, we hypothesize that extreme data distributions or highly
niche optimization events may render these specific models incompatible with generalized architectures.
6.3.2
Trade-offs in Hyperparameter Optimization
Although Multi-Model Optimization (MMO) saves significant engineering time by identifying globally optimal
hyperparameter configurations, this generalized approach inherently trades away the granular performance
gains achievable through per-model fine-tuning. However, the objective of large-scale model standardization
is not the absolute elimination of customization; rather, it is to enable scalable iteration across a diverse fleet.
To mitigate this trade-off, the template is designed to expose hyperparameters that exhibit high cross-model
variance (e.g. optimizer settings), allowing for targeted per-model tuning when strictly necessary. Ultimately,
managing a dynamic model ecosystem requires continuously re-evaluating the delicate balance between strict
standardization and bespoke optimization.
6.3.3
Viability of Global Optima
There is valid skepticism regarding whether novel ML techniques can actually converge on a global optimum
that improves performance across a highly heterogeneous model suite. However, our empirical data indicates
that the vast majority of techniques do find a globally optimal configuration, yielding statistically significant
improvements across diverse data distributions and optimization targets. Specifically, over four development
cycles, only 11% of candidate techniques failed to find such a generalized configuration. Techniques that fail
to generalize fleet-wide but demonstrate strong gains during isolated, per-model optimization remain prime
candidates for parameter exposure within the template, as discussed previously.
13
7
Conclusion
We present the Standard Model Template (SMT), a framework designed to manage large recommendation
model fleets through rigorous ML model standardization. Across four development cycles and extensive
production deployments, this framework has achieved:
• 0.63% average offline performance improvement over independently optimized baselines.
• 0.86% cumulative online lift.
• 92% reduction in per-model engineering effort.
• 6.3× technique propagation throughput.
These results empirically demonstrate that architectural standardization can consistently outperform isolated,
independent optimization for large-scale recommendation systems. Ultimately, a well-designed, continuously
updated template serves as a robust universal foundation, allowing model-specific requirements to be resolved
through data and task configurations rather than costly architectural modifications.
References
Maximilian Balandat, Brian Karrer, Daniel Jiang, Samuel Daulton, Ben Letham, Andrew G Wilson, and Eytan Bakshy.
Botorch: A framework for efficient monte-carlo bayesian optimization. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 33:21524–21538, 2020.
Denis Baylor, Eric Breck, Heng-Tze Cheng, Noah Fiedel, Chuan Yu Foo, Zakaria Haque, Salem Haykal, Mustafa Ispir,
Vihan Jain, Levent Koc, et al. Tfx: A tensorflow-based production-scale machine learning platform. In Proceedings
of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 1387–1395, 2017.
Yutian Chen, Xingyou Song, Chansoo Lee, Zi Wang, Qiuyi Zhang, David Dohan, Kazuya Kawakami, Greg Kochanski,
Arnaud Doucet, Marc’aurelio Ranzato, Sagi Perel, and Nando de Freitas. Towards learning universal hyperparameter
optimizers with transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13320, 2022a.
Yutian Chen, Xingyou Song, Chansoo Lee, Zi Wang, Qiuyi Zhang, David Dohan, Kazuya Kawakami, Greg Kochanski,
Arnaud Doucet, Marc’aurelio Ranzato, Sagi Perel, and Nando de Freitas. Towards learning universal hyperparameter
optimizers with transformers. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, NIPS ’22, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2022b. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713871088.
Paul Covington, Jay Adams, and Emre Sargin. Deep neural networks for youtube recommendations. In Proceedings of
the 10th ACM conference on recommender systems, pages 191–198, 2016.
Matthias Feurer, Aaron Klein, Katharina Eggensperger, Jost Springenberg, Manuel Blum, and Frank Hutter. Efficient
and robust automated machine learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Djordje Gligorijevic, Jelena Gligorijevic, and Aaron Flores. Prospective modeling of users for online display advertising
via deep time-aware model. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge
Management, pages 2461–2468, 2020.
Daniel Golovin, Benjamin Solnik, Subhodeep Moitra, Greg Kochanski, John Karro, and D. Sculley. Google vizier: A
service for black-box optimization. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’17, page 1487–1495, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing
Machinery. ISBN 9781450348874. doi: 10.1145/3097983.3098043. https://doi.org/10.1145/3097983.3098043.
Kim Hazelwood, Sarah Bird, David Brooks, Soumith Chintala, Utku Diril, Dmytro Dzhulgakov, Mohamed Fawzy,
Bill Jia, Yangqing Jia, Aditya Kalro, et al. Applied machine learning at facebook: A datacenter infrastructure
perspective. In 2018 IEEE international symposium on high performance computer architecture (HPCA), pages
620–629. IEEE, 2018.
Xinran He, Junfeng Pan, Ou Jin, Tianbing Xu, Bo Liu, Tao Xu, Yanxin Shi, Antoine Atallah, Ralf Herbrich, Stuart
Bowers, et al. Practical lessons from predicting clicks on ads at facebook. In Proceedings of the eighth international
workshop on data mining for online advertising, pages 1–9, 2014.
J. Hermann.
Meet michelangelo:
Uber’s machine learning platform, 2017.
https://www.uber.com/blog/
michelangelo-machine-learning-platform/. Accessed: 2026-02-15.
14
Frank Hutter, Lars Kotthoff, and Joaquin Vanschoren. Automated machine learning: methods, systems, challenges.
Springer, 2019.
Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang.
Darts:
Differentiable architecture search.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.09055, 2018.
Meta AI. Four MTIA chips in two years: Scaling AI experiences for billions. Meta AI Blog, March 2026. https:
//ai.meta.com/blog/meta-mtia-scale-ai-chips-for-billions/. Accessed: 2026-03-16.
Dheevatsa Mudigere, Yuchen Hao, Jianyu Huang, Andrew Tulloch, Srinivas Sridharan, Xing Liu, Mustafa Ozdal,
Jade Nie, Jongsoo Park, Liang Luo, et al. High-performance, distributed training of large-scale deep learning
recommendation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05158, 2021.
Maxim Naumov, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Hao-Jun Michael Shi, Jianyu Huang, Narayanan Sundaraman, Jongsoo Park,
Xiaodong Wang, Udit Gupta, Carole-Jean Wu, Alisson G Azzolini, et al. Deep learning recommendation model for
personalization and recommendation systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.00091, 2019.
Ruoxi Wang, Bin Fu, Gang Fu, and Mingliang Wang. Deep & cross network for ad click predictions. In Proceedings of
the ADKDD’17, pages 1–7. 2017.
Ruoxi Wang, Rakesh Shivanna, Derek Cheng, Sagar Jain, Dong Lin, Lichan Hong, and Ed Chi. Dcn v2: Improved deep
& cross network and practical lessons for web-scale learning to rank systems. In Proceedings of the web conference
2021, pages 1785–1797, 2021.
Wei Wen, Kuang-Hung Liu, Igor Fedorov, Xin Zhang, Hang Yin, Weiwei Chu, Kaveh Hassani, Mengying Sun, Jiang
Liu, Xu Wang, Lin Jiang, Yuxin Chen, Buyun Zhang, Xi Liu, Dehua Cheng, Zhengxing Chen, Guang Zhao,
Fangqiu Han, Jiyan Yang, Yuchen Hao, Liang Xiong, and Wen-Yen Chen. Rankitect: Ranking architecture search
battling world-class engineers at meta scale. In Companion Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024, WWW
’24, page 73–82, New York, NY, USA, 2024a. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400701726. doi:
10.1145/3589335.3648304. https://doi.org/10.1145/3589335.3648304.
Wei Wen, Quanyu Zhu, Weiwei Chu, Wen-Yen Chen, and Jiyan Yang. Cubicml: Automated ml for distributed ml
systems co-design with ml prediction of performance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.04585, 09 2024b.
Hang Yin, Kuang-Hung Liu, Mengying Sun, Yuxin Chen, Buyun Zhang, Jiang Liu, Vivek Sehgal, Rudresh Rajnikant
Panchal, Eugen Hotaj, Xi Liu, Daifeng Guo, Jamey Zhang, Zhou Wang, Shali Jiang, Huayu Li, Zhengxing Chen,
Wen-Yen Chen, Jiyan Yang, and Wei Wen. Automl for large capacity modeling of meta’s ranking systems. In
Companion Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024, WWW ’24, page 374–382, New York, NY, USA, 2024.
Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400701726. doi: 10.1145/3589335.3648336. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3589335.3648336.
Zhichen Zeng, Xiaolong Liu, Mengyue Hang, Xiaoyi Liu, Qinghai Zhou, Chaofei Yang, Yiqun Liu, Yichen Ruan,
Laming Chen, Yuxin Chen, et al. Interformer: Effective heterogeneous interaction learning for click-through rate
prediction. In Proceedings of the 34th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management,
pages 6225–6233, 2025.
Jiaqi Zhai, Lucy Liao, Xing Liu, Yueming Wang, Rui Li, Xuan Cao, Leon Gao, Zhaojie Gong, Fangda Gu, Michael He,
et al. Actions speak louder than words: Trillion-parameter sequential transducers for generative recommendations.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17152, 2024.
Buyun Zhang, Liang Luo, Xi Liu, Jay Li, Zeliang Chen, Weilin Zhang, Xiaohan Wei, Yuchen Hao, Michael Tsang,
Wenjun Wang, et al. Dhen: A deep and hierarchical ensemble network for large-scale click-through rate prediction.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11014, 2022.
Buyun Zhang, Liang Luo, Yuxin Chen, Jade Nie, Xi Liu, Daifeng Guo, Yanli Zhao, Shen Li, Yuchen Hao, Yantao Yao,
et al. Wukong: Towards a scaling law for large-scale recommendation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02545, 2024a.
Tunhou Zhang, Wei Wen, Igor Fedorov, Xi Liu, Buyun Zhang, Fangqiu Han, Wen-Yen Chen, Yiping Han, Feng Yan,
Hai Li, and Yiran Chen. Distdnas: Search efficient feature interactions within 2 hours. In 2024 IEEE International
Conference on Big Data (BigData), pages 1492–1499, 2024b. doi: 10.1109/BigData62323.2024.10825061.
Tunhou Zhang, Dehua Cheng, Yuchen He, Zhengxing Chen, Xiaoliang Dai, Liang Xiong, Yudong Liu, Feng Cheng,
Yufan Cao, Feng Yan, Hai Li, Yiran Chen, and Wei Wen. Towards automated model design on recommender
systems. ACM Trans. Recomm. Syst., 3(3), March 2025. doi: 10.1145/3706124. https://doi.org/10.1145/3706124.
15
Yanli Zhao, Andrew Gu, Rohan Varma, Liang Luo, Chien-Chin Huang, Min Xu, Less Wright, Hamid Shojanazeri,
Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, et al. Pytorch fsdp: experiences on scaling fully sharded data parallel. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.11277, 2023.
Barret Zoph and Quoc V Le. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01578,
2016.
16
