CSI-tuples-based 3D Channel Fingerprints
Construction Assisted by MultiModal Learning
Chenjie Xie, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Li You, Senior Member, IEEE,
Ruirong Chen, Gaoning He, Xiqi Gao, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Low-altitude communications can promote the in-
tegration of aerial and terrestrial wireless resources, expand
network coverage, and enhance transmission quality, thereby
empowering the development of sixth-generation (6G) mobile
communications. As an enabler for low-altitude transmission, 3D
channel ﬁngerprints (3D-CF), also referred to as the 3D radio
map or 3D channel knowledge map, are expected to enhance the
understanding of communication environments and assist in the
acquisition of channel state information (CSI), thereby avoiding
repeated estimations and reducing computational complexity. In
this paper, we propose a modularized multimodal framework to
construct 3D-CF. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst establish the 3D-CF model
as a collection of CSI-tuples based on Rician fading channels, with
each tuple comprising the low-altitude vehicle’s (LAV) positions
and its corresponding statistical CSI. In consideration of the
heterogeneous structures of different prior data, we formulate
the 3D-CF construction problem as a multimodal regression task,
where the target channel information in the CSI-tuple can be
estimated directly by its corresponding LAV positions, together
with communication measurements and geographic environment
maps. Then, a high-efﬁciency multimodal framework is proposed
accordingly, which includes a correlation-based multimodal fu-
sion (Corr-MMF) module, a multimodal representation (MMR)
module, and a CSI regression (CSI-R) module. Numerical results
show that our proposed framework can efﬁciently construct 3D-
CF and achieve at least 27.5% higher accuracy than the state-
of-the-art algorithms under different communication scenarios,
demonstrating its competitive performance and excellent gener-
alization ability. We also analyze the computational complexity
and illustrate its superiority in terms of the inference time.
Index Terms—3D channel ﬁngerprints, multimodal framework,
CSI-tuples, low-altitude communication.
I. INTRODUCTION
As the sixth-generation (6G) mobile communications con-
tinue to evolve, massive demands for low-altitude appli-
cations have arisen across transportation, agriculture, and
emergency services, catalyzing the vigorous development of
low-altitude communications [2]–[6]. Currently, low-altitude
networks strive to provide real-time communication and nav-
igation services for low-altitude vehicles (LAVs), facilitating
the interoperability and coordination with terrestrial networks,
delivering communication support for speciﬁc regions, and
enhancing both network coverage and transmission quality
Part of this work was accepted by IEEE WCNC 2026 [1].
Chenjie Xie, Li You, and Xiqi Gao are with the National Mobile Commu-
nications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China,
and also with the Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing 211111, China (e-
mail: cjxie@seu.edu.cn, lyou@seu.edu.cn, xqgao@seu.edu.cn).
Ruirong Chen and Gaoning He are with the Huawei Technologies Co.,
Ltd., Shenzhen 518129, China (e-mail: ruirongchen@huawei.com, hegaon-
ing@huawei.com).
[2], [6]. In the foreseeable future, low-altitude communications
will further promote the synergistic integration of aerial and
terrestrial resources, empowering a new paradigm for the
development of mobile communications.
However, acquiring high-quality channel state information
(CSI) in low-altitude communication systems remains an unre-
solved challenge, which signiﬁcantly impacts the performance
of low-altitude wireless transmission. Due to the spatially
non-uniformly distributed scatterers [7], [8], the radio envi-
ronments in low-altitude scenarios become more complicated,
and the signal propagation characteristics vary signiﬁcantly
across different altitudes, rendering the acquisition of accurate
CSI considerably challenging. On the other hand, LAVs in
low-altitude airspace exhibit high mobility, constrained power
consumption, limited payload, and restricted computing power
[7], [9], making the acquisition of real-time and efﬁcient CSI
more difﬁcult.
Fortunately, channel ﬁngerprints (CF), also referred to as the
channel knowledge map (CKM) [10] or the radio environment
map (REM) [11], have emerged as a novel approach to
address the aforementioned challenge. By deﬁnition, CF is a
site-speciﬁc database storing the user-location-related CSI. In
terrestrial communication systems, 2D-CF has demonstrated
its effectiveness in assisting the acquisition of channel infor-
mation, which supports the resource management [12], beam
selection [13], wireless positioning [14], and other applications
without repetitive estimations. Comparably, in low-altitude
communication systems, 3D-CF will also directly provide
the corresponding CSI based on the positions or trajecto-
ries of LAVs, thereby reducing pilot overhead, conserving
wireless resources, and improving transmission efﬁciency. It
is foreseeable that the introduction of 3D-CF will certainly
bring a new perspective to the development of low-altitude
communications.
Currently, several studies have commenced to explore ap-
proaches for high-efﬁciency 3D-CF construction. For exam-
ple, the authors in [15] detected the number of radiation
sources based on the path loss (PL) model and constructed
a 3D spectrum map accordingly. Nevertheless, adopting such
a one-size-ﬁts-all PL model inevitably leads to substantial
errors for 3D-CF construction due to its considerable vari-
ability across different altitudes. To address the limitations
of model-based approaches, data-driven methods have been
extensively investigated. For instance, the authors in [16] lever-
aged LAV-based measurements to evaluate the interpolation
algorithms, including nearest neighbor (NN), linear, inverse
distance weighting (IDW), and ordinary Kriging, validating
arXiv:2603.25288v1  [cs.IT]  26 Mar 2026
their feasibility for 3D-CF reconstruction. Gaussian process
regression (GPR), sparse Bayesian learning, and compressed
sensing (CS) were also developed to reduce the required
number of samples in [17]–[21]. Additionally, t-singular value
decomposition (t-SVD), ﬁber sampling tensor decomposition
(FSTD), block-term tensor decomposition (BTD), and other
tensor-based algorithms were adopted to further enhance the
computational efﬁciency by leveraging the smoothness prior
of measurements in [22]–[25]. However, these pure data-
driven methods are entirely environment-blind. In practice,
wireless channels are profoundly inﬂuenced by the geographic
environment through a complex interplay of signal reﬂection,
diffraction, and scattering mechanisms [26], [27], especially
in low-altitude communication systems where line-of-sight
(LOS) paths are predominant.
To empower the geographic environment-assisted 3D-CF
construction, researchers turn to machine learning (ML) for
feasible solutions. For instance, the authors in [28] designed
two deep neural networks (DNNs) to jointly reconstruct the
3D REM and its communication environment. Moreover,
generative artiﬁcial intelligence (GenAI) was adopted for high-
quality 3D-CF generation, supporting both radiation-aware and
radiation-unaware scenarios with sparse spatial observations
based on generative adversarial network (GAN) or diffusion
model (DM) [29]–[31]. However, these computer vision-based
GenAI algorithms need to model 3D-CF as images, requiring
a discretization for the target region where LAVs in the same
grid (pixel) share the identical CSI (pixel values) [32], [33].
This assumption introduces some critical limitations. Firstly,
the uniform discretization reduces the ﬂexibility of 3D-CF.
Unlike terrestrial networks, LAV trajectories in low-altitude
airspace are highly communication-demand-driven [34]. In-
discriminate gridding merely results in a mismatch between
3D-CF resolution and communication demands while wasting
computational resources. Secondly, the intra-grid CSI sharing
induces signiﬁcant errors for 3D-CF applications. Particularly
when buildings exist within the grid, PL and channel shad-
owing for LAVs on opposite sides may differ substantially
and cannot be represented by the same CSI. Thirdly, the
grid-based 3D model triggers an exponential increase in data
volume, resulting in high computational complexity and being
unsuitable for practical deployment.
Multimodal learning (MML), a computer agent with in-
telligent capabilities such as understanding, reasoning, and
learning, enables the integration of diverse data modalities for
predictive tasks and offers a promising avenue to resolve the
aforementioned issues of GenAI by transcending the image-
only processing constraint. Currently, [35]–[45] have demon-
strated enormous application potentials of MML-based CSI
prediction in wireless communications. Particularly for 3D-
CF construction in low-altitude systems, which involves more
complex data modalities, including geographic environment
maps, sparse communication measurements, and LAV coordi-
nates, MML is expected to process and integrate the underly-
ing information across these modalities, thereby offering novel
solutions for 3D-CF construction and enhancing environmental
awareness in low-altitude communication systems.
Motivated by the above discussions, we investigate the
3D-CF construction based on MML for low-altitude com-
munication systems. Speciﬁcally, we encapsulate the LAV’s
coordinates and its corresponding channel information into a
CSI-tuple, bypassing the discretization operation and directly
ﬁtting the mapping relationship between tuple elements to
minimize the 3D-CF errors. Notably, the CSI stored in 3D-
CF can be ﬂexibly deﬁned according to practical transmission
requirements, such as the received signal strength (RSS),
coverage, LOS probability, or even the channel covariance
matrix and power angle spectrum (PAS). Then, we sufﬁciently
consider the prior knowledge to assist the construction of
3D-CF, including geographic environment maps, sparse com-
munication measurements, and LAV positions. Due to their
heterogeneous data structures that can not be processed by a
single-type network, we regard them as multimodal data and
transform the 3D-CF construction problem into a multimodal
regression task, thereby developing a modularized 3D-CF
multimodal framework. The main contributions of this paper
can be summarized as follows:
• Based on the ground-to-LAV Rician fading channel
model, we propose a 3D-CF model that is more suitable
for low-altitude communication systems. Speciﬁcally, the
3D-CF is conceptualized as a collection of CSI-tuples
with each tuple comprising the LAV position and its cor-
responding channel information. This model enables the
adaptive adjustments of CSI-tuples according to practical
communication demands, thus making the ﬂexible 3D-CF
construction possible.
• Given the heterogeneous structures of different prior
data, we formulate the 3D-CF construction problem as
a multimodal regression task, where the target channel
information in the CSI-tuple can be estimated directly by
its corresponding LAV location, geographic environment
maps, and measurement data.
• Based on the structural characteristics and internal rela-
tions of prior data, we propose a highly efﬁcient modu-
larized multimodal framework for 3D-CF construction.
During the data processing stage, a correlation-based
multimodal fusion (Corr-MMF) module and a multimodal
representation (MMR) module are designed based on
the relativity between communication environments and
measurement data, which extract and learn features of
the CSI distribution in horizontal and vertical direc-
tions, respectively. In the CSI estimation phase, we align
these different features via embedding operations and
design the channel state information regression (CSI-R)
module to estimate CSI by leveraging LAV positions
as conditional inputs, thereby recovering CSI-tuples and
accomplishing the 3D-CF construction.
• We present numerical results to show that the pro-
posed modularized multimodal framework achieves at
least 27.5% higher accuracy than state-of-the-art algo-
rithms in 3D-CF construction. Experimental results also
demonstrate its competitive performance in generalization
capability and computational complexity.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, we establish the ground-to-LAV channel model and 3D-CF
model in low-altitude communication scenarios, and formulate
the construction problem accordingly. Section III elaborates
on the structure of our proposed multimodal framework.
Numerical results are presented in Section IV. Finally, we
conclude the paper in Section V.
Notations: = √−1 denotes the imaginary unit. aT
represents the transpose of vector a and ||A||F is the Frobenius
norm for matrix A. CM×N×K denotes the M × N × K
dimensional complex tensor space and R3 represents the three-
dimensional real space. E{·} denotes the expectation opera-
tion. CN(a, B) represents the complex Gaussian distribution
with mean a and covariance B. The notation ≜is used for
deﬁnitions.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
In this section, we introduce the channel model for ground-
to-LAV links in low-altitude airspace. Then, a CSI-tuples-
based 3D-CF model is established accordingly, which is highly
ﬂexible and does not rely on the spatial gridding. Based on
the characteristics of 3D-CF, we formulate the construction
problem as a multimodal regression task with the assistance
of prior data.
A. Channel Model
As illustrated in Fig. 1, we consider a ground-to-LAV
system in low-altitude airspace, where the base station (BS),
positioned at (x, y, 0), is equipped with a uniform linear array
(ULA) comprising NBS antenna elements [46]. For simplicity,
each LAV in the target region employs a single antenna and
moves in a constant velocity in a time interval of interest. To
better characterize the ground-to-LAV links in target areas, we
assume that each channel includes a line-of-sight (LOS) path
and several reﬂected paths, both contributing to the received
signal for a speciﬁc LAV [47]. By adopting the correlated
Rician fading channel, the downlink (DL) channel between the
BS and the m-th LAV over the n-th symbol can be modeled
as [47], [48]
hm[n] =
p
βm

¯hm[n] + ˜hm[n]

,
(1)
where βm represents the large-scale channel fading coefﬁcient,
¯hm[n] and ˜hm[n] denote the LOS component and NLOS
component, respectively.
For the LOS component ¯hm[n], deﬁne K as the Rician
factor and we have [48]–[51]
¯hm[n] =
r
K
K + 1α(φm,0, θm,0)e(2πνmξm,0Tsn+ϕm,0), (2)
where νm is the Doppler shift, Ts is the system sampling
duration, ϕm,0 is the phase shift for LOS component, and
ξm,0 ≜vmkT
m,0. vm is the unit velocity vector with an
elevation angle φm,v and an azimuth angle θm,v, which is
given by
vm = [cos(θm,v) sin(φm,v), sin(θm,v) sin(φm,v), cos(φm,v)].
(3)
Reflected Path
LAV
LOS Path
BS
Movement 
Direction
reflected path
LOS path
cted path
cted path
LOS pat
S pathththt
LOS pat
LOS p ththt
refle
refle
©m ,  0
©m , v
¶m , v
©m ,  i
¶m ,  i
¶m ,  0
X
Z
Y
BS
LAV
Fig. 1: A typical ground-to-LAV communication scenario, where all possible
channel components include one LOS path and several reﬂected paths. Its
propagation geometry takes the BS as the origin.
km,0 is the unit wave vector with an elevation angle φm,0 and
an azimuth angle θm,0, which is given by [52]
km,0 = [cos(θm,0) sin(φm,0), sin(θm,0) sin(φm,0), cos(φm,0)].
(4)
α(φm,0, θm,0) is the steering vector with an elevation angle
φm,0 and an azimuth angle θm,0, which can be expressed as
[53]
α(φm,0, θm,0) = [1, e2π dm
λc ζm,0, . . . , e2π(NBS−1) dm
λc ζm,0],
(5)
where dm is the inter-antenna spacing, λc is the wavelength,
and ζm,0 ≜cos(θm,0) sin(φm,0).
For the NLOS component ˜hm[n], deﬁne L as the number
of NLOS paths, we have [49], [54], [55]
˜hm[n] =
r
1
K + 1
L
X
l=1
α(φm,l, θm,l)
√
L
e(2πνmξm,lTsn+ϕm,l),
(6)
where ξm,l ≜vmkT
m,l with vm and km,l similar to (3)
and (4), respectively. Assume that {φm,l}L
l=1, {θm,l}L
l=1, and
{ϕm,l}L
l=1 are independent random variables, then, according
to the central limit theorem [56], when L tends to inﬁnity,
˜hm[n] will approximate a zero-mean complex Gaussian ran-
dom process, i.e., ˜hm[n] ∼CN(0, Λm), where Λm represents
the positive semi-deﬁnite spatial covariance matrix of the
NLoS components for the m-th LAV [47]–[49], [54], [55].
Based on the analysis of (2) and (6), the channel model
between the BS and the m-th LAV over the n-th symbol can
be expressed as hm[n] ∼CN(H, R) [47]–[49], where mean
H = √βm¯hm[n] and covariance R = βmΛm. In accordance
with this channel model, the RSS can be written by
gm = PBS||hm[n]||2
F ,
(7)
where PBS denotes the transmit power.
B. 3D-CF Model and Problem Formulation
Based on the channel model presented in Section II-A, we
next introduce the 3D-CF model for LAVs in low-altitude
airspace and then formulate the construction problem.
1) 3D-CF Model: Traditional 3D-CF model typically par-
titions the target area into grids, where all receivers within
the same grid share the identical channel information, thereby
converting CF into an image [32], [33]. In contrast, we model
3D-CF as a collection of CSI-tuples {(X, Ω)}, where X repre-
sents the LAV coordinates array and Ωdenotes its associated
channel information. On one hand, for any LAV in low-
altitude airspace, we can always locate its corresponding CSI-
tuple in 3D-CF and obtain the accurate channel information,
thereby reducing errors induced by spatial gridding. On the
other hand, the collection of CSI-tuples can be dynamically
adjusted or reconstructed according to terminal density, low-
altitude trafﬁc load, and spatial utilization, maximizing the 3D-
CF ﬂexibility while minimizing unnecessary computational
overhead in practical applications.
In accordance with the channel model in Section II-A, we
deﬁne the RSS in (7) as the target channel information stored
in 3D-CF, i.e., Ω= gm. Therefore, the collection of CSI-tuples
is ultimately expressed as
G = {(Xm, Ψ(Xm))|Ψ : Xm ∈R3 →gm},
(8)
which is our proposed 3D-CF model. Note that we deﬁne Ωas
RSS solely for the convenience of elucidating the model, task,
and methodology. In practice, Ωcan be deﬁned as different
channel information according to practical communication
requirements, such as PL, delay, Doppler shift, or even the
channel covariance matrix, and the optimal beam indices, to
match diverse applications.
2) Problem Formulation: Under the deﬁnition of (8), the
problem of constructing 3D-CF is transformed into the task of
exploring function Ψ, that is, ﬁnding a mapping relationship
from the LAV location to its corresponding RSS.
However, directly ﬁtting Ψ is extremely challenging due to
the absence of distinct correlations between LAV location and
its RSS. Consequently, we need to seek some prior information
to facilitate the construction of Ψ. On one hand, the low-
altitude geographic environment, which can be viewed as an
image and conveniently captured by tools like RGB cameras,
exerts a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the distribution of RSS. In
terrestrial networks, geographic information has been proven
to be effective and crucial in assisting the reconstruction of
2D-CF [33], [57]–[59]. In low-altitude airspace, environmental
effects on RSS are more pronounced due to the dominance of
LOS paths in ground-to-LAV channels. Therefore, the low-
altitude geographic environment, denoted as E, is one of the
essential prior information to facilitate the construction of
Ψ. On the other hand, measurable CF sampling data near
the ground, denoted as tensor Ggro, can also serve as the
prior information, as they partly reﬂect the signal propagation
characteristics and reveal the underlying relationship between
terminal locations and RSS. Based on E and Ggro, the mapping
relationship Ψ can be rewritten as
Ψ : (Xm, E, Ggro) →gm, Xm ∈R3.
(9)
In practice, it is challenging to derive a feasible ana-
lytical solution by traditional interpolation methods, hence,
we employ a deep neural network Ψ′ to ﬁt Ψ in (9). In
particular, the network Ψ′ involves three modal variables as
inputs: the low-altitude communication environment E, which
encompasses both horizontal and vertical information of all
buildings, vegetation, and other structures in the target low-
altitude airspace; CF sampling data Ggro, which indicate the
signal propagation characteristics; and the LAV position Xm.
Therefore, we formulate the problem of ﬁtting Ψ by the
network Ψ′, i.e., the construction of 3D-CF, as a multimodal
regression task, which is given by
arg min
Θ
E

||Ψ′ [(Xm, E, Ggro); Θ] −gm||2
F
	
(10)
s.t. gm = Ψ(Xm, E, Ggro),
(10a)
Xm ∈R3,
(10b)
where Θ is the trainable parameters for the network Ψ′.
III. MULTIMODAL FRAMEWORK FOR 3D-CF
CONSTRUCTION
As analyzed in Section II-B, mutual relationships among
Xm, E, and Ggro reveal the underlying patterns of spatial RSS
distribution, hence, in this section, we develop a modularized
multimodal framework to ﬁt the mapping relationship Ψ and
construct 3D-CF. As shown in Fig. 2, our proposed 3D-
CF Multimodal framework includes three essential modules:
the Corr-MMF module, the MMR module, and the CSI-R
module, where the ﬁrst two modules are designed to extract
features of CSI distribution and geographic environments in
horizontal and vertical directions, respectively, and the third
module is responsible for spacial CSI prediction and 3D-CF
reconstruction based on these features. Next, we will introduce
them respectively.
A. The Correlation-based MultiModal Fusion (Corr-MMF)
Module
In conventional multimodal learning tasks, data from two
or more media often exhibit strong correlations. Since their
structural characteristics are heterogeneous, it is necessary
to conduct a uniﬁed encoding and combination, known as
MultiModal Fusion (MMF) [60]. By deﬁnition, MMF is the
process of extracting and integrating features from two or more
media to perform the subsequent regression or classiﬁcation
[61]. It leverages the correlation and complementarity among
3. MMR Module
1. Data Modalities (Inputs)
CF Measurements
LAV Positions
Geographic 
Environment Maps
Horizontal Information
Vertical Information
2. Corr-MMF Module
Feature Extraction
Feature Fusion
3. MMR Module
4. CSI-R Module
Feature Extraction
Feature Embedding
CSI Regression
conditional 
information
CSI (Output)
3D-CF
: data flow
: training flow
3. MMR Module
Fig. 2: Diagram of the proposed 3D-CF MultiModal framework. This scheme includes three essential modules: the Corr-MMF module, the MMR module,
and the CSI-R module. The ﬁrst two modules are designed to extract features of CSI distribution and geographic environments in horizontal and vertical
directions, respectively, and the third module is responsible for spacial CSI prediction and 3D-CF reconstruction.
different data to keep critical features and remove redundant
ones, integrating various information into a stable multimodal
representation [62].
In our 3D-CF construction task, available CF measurements
Ggro near the ground exhibit a strong correlation with the
horizontal geographic environment information Eh [63]–[65]:
on one hand, RSS in Ggro reveal the possible distribution of
buildings, vegetation, and other structures in the target area
[66]; on the other hand, Eh indicates the potential reﬂection,
diffraction, scattering, and obstruction during signal propaga-
tion, thus affecting the distribution of RSS [67]. Consequently,
exploring and fusing the correlated characteristics between
Ggro and Eh are crucial for the multimodal framework to learn
3D-CF patterns in the horizontal direction, which motivates
our design of the Corr-MMF module. In particular, the low-
dimensional feature representations extracted and fused by the
Corr-MMF module must satisfy the following two criteria:
Criterion 1: The low-dimensional feature representations
should maximally preserve the critical information inherent
to both Ggro and Eh;
Criterion 2: The low-dimensional feature representations
should effectively preserve the correlated information among
Ggro and Eh.
1) Network Design for Criterion 1: For Criterion 1, a
workable structure is the feature extractor (encoder) used to
implement the key information extraction for both Ggro and
Eh. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the encoder includes two stages:
feature extraction and feature fusion.
During the feature extraction stage, two sub-encoders,
E1 and E2, are employed to extract features of Ggro and
Eh, respectively, eliminating data redundancy and achieving
dimensionality reduction. Speciﬁcally, each of E1 and E2
consists of several convolutional layers, each of which is
accompanied by a rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) to conduct the
downsampling operation. To further speed up the convergences
and simultaneously enhance the generalization performance of
the network, we incorporate the batch normalization (BN) after
each convolutional layer.
Furthermore, we observe that RSS of the speciﬁc LAV in
3D-CF exhibits a strong correlation with the channel informa-
tion and geographical environment in its vicinity [68]. Con-
sequently, a terminal attention mechanism (TAM) is designed
for E1 and E2 to focus on data blocks closer to the LAV.
Speciﬁcally, we construct two Gaussian masks MG and ME,
with their dimensions identical to Ggro and Eh, respectively.
For the (m, n)-th element in MG and ME, we have
MG(m, n) = ME(m, n) = e−
d2m,n
2σ2 ,
(11)
where dm,n denotes the distance between this (m, n)-th el-
ement and LAV position, and σ2 the variance of Gaussian
distribution for MG and ME. It is worth noting here that MG
and ME in TAM will assign different weights to Ggro and Eh
at different spatial positions, thereby optimizing the process
of feature extraction. Meanwhile, the Gaussian-distributed
weights inherently maintain continuity and differentiability,
facilitating the backward propagation computations for each
sub-encoder.
Overall, outputs of the sub-encoders E1 and E2 can be
Encoder
Virtual
Decoder
Stage 1
Stage 2
Fusion Features
F
Z
D
Latent
Space
T-C-AM
LAV Position
TAM
CAM
E2
E3
Feedback
E1
G gro
E h
Output
Fusion Features
(a) Diagram of the proposed Corr-MMF module. The network includes a two-
stages encoder, a latent space, and a virtual decoder. The terminal attention
mechanism (TAM) and channel attention mechanism (CAM) are introduced in
this two-stages encoder as well.
Mixed 
Features
weighted
Mixed Features
AvgPool
MaxPool
Channel Attention 
Vector
Sigmoid
weighted
+
...
Shared Conv
(b) Diagram of the channel attention mechanism (CAM).
Fig. 3: Diagram of the Corr-MMF module and its CAM.
written as
OE1 = BN(ReLU(Conv(MG ⊙Ggro))) ∈Ch×w×c,
(12)
OE2 = BN(ReLU(Conv(ME ⊙Eh))) ∈Ch×w×c,
(13)
where ⊙represents the Hadamard product, h, w, c are heights,
widths, and channels of OE1 and OE2, respectively.
During the feature fusion stage, we adopt an add layer
to integrate OE1 and OE2. Then, the added feature OF =
OE1 + OE2 ∈Ch×w×c is fed into a sub-encoder E3 for
further extraction of critical information, thereby completing
the feature fusion. Note that the add layer here does not
expand the number of channels in OF, but rather exponentially
enhances the feature informativeness they contain. Therefore,
the subsequent sub-encoder E3 must be capable of adaptively
evaluating the importance of each channel to discern crucial
features and emphasize them.
To this end, we introduce a channel attention mechanism
(CAM) to assign varying weights to different channels [69], as
depicted in Fig. 3(b). Speciﬁcally, CAM employs an average
pooling and a max pooling to separately obtain the global
statistical information of each channel in mixed features OF,
denoted as avgpool(OF) ∈C1×1×c and maxpool(OF) ∈
C1×1×c, respectively. Subsequently, shared convolutional lay-
ers with a kernel size of 1 are utilized to convert avgpool(OF)
and maxpool(OF) into two sets of preliminary weight vectors.
The summation of these two weights is then normalized via
the Sigmoid function to generate the ultimate channel attention
vector Vc ∈C1×1×c, which is given by
Vc = Sigmoid{Conv[avgpool(OF)]+Conv[maxpool(OF)]}.
(14)
By broadcasting and multiplying Vc with OF, the sub-encoder
E3 will focus more on the weighted crucial features, thereby
optimizing the entire performance.
Overall, assume that the sub-encoder E3 has the same
structure as E1 and E2, its outputs can be expressed as
OE3 = BN(Relu(Conv(MC ⊙OF))) ∈Z,
(15)
where MC ∈Ch×w×c is the channel attention tensor by
broadcasting Vc, with dimensions identical to those of OF.
As shown in Fig. 3(a), OE3 represents the data manifold in
the latent space Z, which is precisely the output of the Corr-
MMF module. For ease of understanding, we denote OE3 as
OCorrMMF.
Based on the above two-stage encoder, a virtual decoder
D is adopted accordingly to further ensure the maximal
preservation of key features described in Criterion 1. Note that
the decoder D is termed as “virtual” because the Corr-MMF
module exclusively requires the output OCorrMMF, while D
solely serves as an optimization feedback.
2) Correlation Evaluation for Criterion 2: For Criterion
2, we have to develop additional constraints for Corr-MMF
module to effectively preserve the correlated information
among Ggro and Eh. For ease of derivation and analysis,
denote the two-stage encoder in Fig. 3(a) as function f(·),
where f(Z) = OCorrMMF with the two-view input Z =
(Ggro, Eh). Consequently, we can separately obtain the key
features from Ggro and Eh by setting Eh = 0 and Ggro = 0,
denoted as f(ZE=0) and f(ZG=0), respectively. Let fi(ZE=0)
and fi(ZG=0) represent the i-th elements of f(ZE=0) and
f(ZG=0), respectively, by introducing the adjusted cosine
similarity, the correlation can be expressed as
corr[f(ZE=0), f(ZG=0)] =
PN
i=1 ∆g,i∆e,i
qPN
i=1 ∆2
g,i
qPN
i=1 ∆2
e,i
,
(16)
where ∆g,i = fi(ZE=0) −f(ZE=0), ∆e,i = fi(ZG=0) −
f(ZG=0), f(ZE=0) and f(ZG=0) are the mean values for the
key features from Ggro and Eh, respectively. Note that max-
imizing (16) empowers the Corr-MMF module to effectively
preserve the correlation between features extracted from Ggro
and Eh, which fulﬁlls the requirements of Criterion 2.
3) Objective Function for Corr-MMF Module: Based on
the whole network in the above 1) and the correlation evalu-
ation in the above 2), we then develop a matching objective
function to train the Corr-MMF module so that it can uni-
formly satisfy the requirements of Criteria 1 and 2.
Denote the network in Fig. 3(a) as F, with its trainable
parameters being ϑ. Note that F is formed by cascading the
encoder f(·) with a virtual decoder D. First, we introduce a
fusion-reconstruction loss Lfusion(ϑ) to ensure that the fused
features f(Z) can be restored to the original two-view input
Z = (Ggro, Eh), which is given by
Lfusion(ϑ) = ||F(Z; ϑ) −Z||F .
(17)
Next, a correlation loss Lcorr(ϑ) is adopted to ensure that the
features extracted and fused by Corr-MMF module effectively
preserve the correlation between Ggro and Eh. According to
(16), Lcorr(ϑ) is designed as
Lcorr(ϑ) = 1 −corr[f(ZE=0), f(ZG=0)],
(18)
where Lcorr(ϑ) ∈[0, 2]. Additionally, we also introduce a
cross-reconstruction loss Lcross(ϑ) to assist the process of
model training, given by
Lcross(ϑ) = ||F(ZG=0; ϑ) −Ggro||F + ||F(ZE=0; ϑ) −Eh||F .
(19)
It is worth noting here that the cross-reconstruction loss
Lcross(ϑ) carries the physical meaning in practice: Due to
the relativity between Eh and Ggro, it is theoretically possible
to recover Eh from Ggro and vice versa [33]. This process
emphasizes not only the reconstruction of Eh and Ggro but
also their correlation, serving as a further enhancement for
both Lcorr(ϑ) and Lfusion(ϑ).
Taking all the losses Lfusion(ϑ), Lcorr(ϑ), and Lcross(ϑ)
into consideration, we present the objective function for Corr-
MMF module as follows:
Lobj(ϑ) = Lfusion(ϑ) + Lcross(ϑ) + λLcorr(ϑ),
(20)
where λ is employed to control the proportion among different
losses. When λ approaches 0, Corr-MMF module disregards
the cross-modal correlation, failing Criterion 2. Conversely,
when λ tends to inﬁnity, it neglects the preservation of key
features and the reconstruction of distinct modalities, violating
Criterion 1. Therefore, λ requires prudent selection to achieve
an optimal balance in Corr-MMF module performance.
B. The MultiModal Representation (MMR) Module
In conventional multimodal learning tasks, raw multime-
dia data cannot be directly processed by machines, so it is
necessary to conduct the uniﬁed description and processing,
known as the MultiModal Representation (MMR) [60], [61].
By deﬁnition, MMR refers to the process of representing
information from several media in a tensor or vector form
[60]. While similar to MMF, it places greater emphasis on the
uniformity across data representations rather than the feature
fusion among different modalities.
In our 3D-CF construction task, the horizontal geographic
information Eh and CF measurements Ggro have already been
fused by Corr-MMF module (f(Z) = OCorrMMF), hence, we
need to further process the vertical geographic information
Ev to align with the data representation of OCorrMMF, which
motivates our design of the MMR module.
Speciﬁcally, the MMR module takes Ev as the input and
employs an auto-encoder as its core architecture, which
comprises an input layer, a downsampling layer, a latent
space, an upsampling layer, and an output layer, as shown
Low-dimensional Representation
Conv+Relu+BN
Input Layer
Output Layer
Conv+Relu+BN
× L
Conv+Relu+BN
Conv+Relu+BN
Downsampling
Upsampling
SAM
Conv+Relu+BN
× L
Conv+Relu+BN
Output
feedback
Output
Output
Output
(a) Diagram of the MMR module. It employs an auto-encoder as the core
architecture, including an input layer, a downsampling layer, a latent space, an
upsampling layer, and an output layer. The spatial attention mechanism (SAM)
is introduced as well.
weighted
weighted
weighted
Features
¦v
MaxPool
AvgPool
Concatenated
weighted
Spatial Attention 
Matrix
(b) Diagram of the spatial attention mechanism (SAM).
Fig. 4: Diagram of the MMR module and its SAM.
in Fig. 4(b). The input layer is primarily utilized for data
reshaping, transforming Ev into an easily processable tensor
OEv
∈Ch×w×c. The following downsampling layer and
upsampling layer are similar to the encoder E3 and virtual
decoder D in Fig. 3(a), respectively. It is worth noting here
that this structural similarity ensures the uniformity between
OCorrMMF and OEv, which is the core of the MMR module.
The output layer, corresponding to the input layer, is ﬁnally
appended to reconstruct data back to Ev.
Additionally, through a meticulous analysis of the data
structure of OEv, we observe that pixels in feature matrices
on each channel imply the speciﬁc characteristics of spatial
communication environment at different positions. Therefore,
the MMR module is expected to adaptively evaluate the im-
portance of each pixel, thus highlighting critical environmental
features at key locations. To this end, we introduce a spatial
attention mechanism (SAM) to assign varying weights to
different pixels in each channel of OEv [69], as depicted in
Fig. 4(b). Speciﬁcally, SAM employs a global max pooling
and a global average pooling to separately obtain feature maps
of each pixel ﬁbers in OEv, denoted as maxpool(OEv) ∈
Ch×w×1 and avgpool(OEv) ∈Ch×w×1, respectively. Subse-
quently, we construct the integrated statistical information by
concatenating maxpool(OEv) and avgpool(OEv), and feed it
into a convolutional layer to derive the preliminary weight
matrix. Afterwards, the Sigmoid function is introduced for
normalization to acquire the ultimate spatial attention matrix
Vs ∈Ch×w×1, which is given by
Vs
= Sigmoid{Conv[Concat(avgpool(OEv), maxpool(OEv))]}.
(21)
By broadcasting and multiplying Vs with OEv, the down-
sampling process will focus more on the weighted crucial
environmental features at key locations, thereby improving the
performance of the MMR module.
Overall, the output of the MMR module, namely the low-
dimensional representation of Ev, can be expressed as
OMMR = BN(Relu(Conv(MS ⊙OEv))),
(22)
where MS
∈Ch×w×c is the spatial attention tensor by
broadcasting Vs, with dimensions identical to those of OEv.
C. The Channel State Information Regression (CSI-R) Module
In the 3D-CF construction task, E and Ggro have been,
respectively, transformed into low-dimensional representations
OCorrMMF and OMMR with identical data structures, where
OCorrMMF embodies the 3D-CF patterns in the horizontal
direction and OMMR embodies the environment patterns in
the vertical direction. Based on this, we next design the CSI-
R module to predict the channel information at a speciﬁc
LAV location X in low-altitude airspace, thereby enabling the
ﬂexible 3D-CF construction free from grid constraints.
×
×
×
Feature Embedding
.
.
.  .  .
Flatten
.
.
.  .  .
Dropout
Dropout
Dropout
Dropout
conditional information
LAV Position
.  .  .
Conv
Conv
FC Regression
OCorrMMF
OMMR
Fig. 5: Diagram of the proposed CSI-R module. The network includes a
feature embedding layer and a fully connected regression layer.
As illustrated in Fig. 5, The CSI-R module uses OCorrMMF
and OMMR as inputs and consists of a feature embedding
layer and a fully connected (FC) regression layer. Regarding
the feature embedding layer, we ﬁrst partition the feature
maps of OCorrMMF and OMMR into several equally-sized
patches by a sliding window. Then, a convolutional layer
with its kernel size matching the patch size is followed to
generate a sequence of embedding vectors. Flattening these
sequences yields a one-dimensional embedding output, which
will be fed into the subsequent FC regression layer. Note
that the entire feature embedding process captures elemental
similarities in the feature maps of OCorrMMF and OMMR,
respectively, positioning elements with higher similarity closer
in the embedding space, thus accelerating the convergence
and enhance the accuracy. The FC regression consists of
several dense layers, each followed by a dropout layer to
prevent severe overﬁtting. During the regression process, 3D
coordinates of the LAV are vectorized and incorporated as
conditional information, prompting the prediction of location-
speciﬁc channel characteristics for 3D-CF construction.
In summary, the mapping relationship Ψ can be effectively
approximated through the cascade of Corr-MMF module,
MMR module, and CSI-R module, thereby enabling the con-
struction of CSI-tuples in (8) and achieving the conﬁguration
of 3D-CF according to practical communication requirements.
This certainly provides novel insights into the low-altitude
communications.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, numerical results are provided to evaluate the
performance of the proposed 3D-CF multimodal framework.
First, we introduce the generation of our Sionna-based datasets
and detail the experiment setup. Then, we explore the impact
of λ on the accuracy of 3D-CF construction. By employing
Kriging interpolation, GPR, GAN, and FL as benchmarks,
we next compare the 3D-CF construction performance across
different scenarios, demonstrating the prediction accuracy and
generalization capability of the proposed 3D-CF multimodal
framework. Finally, we analyze the computational complexity.
A. Datasets
All datasets are generated by NVIDIA Sionna, an open-
source library for research on wireless communication systems
[70]. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst download the geographic environ-
ment maps of Nanjing, China, from OpenStreetMap (OSM)
[71], a collaborative mapping project maintained by a global
community of volunteers who continuously update and vali-
date geographic information. These maps are then imported
into Blender to construct communication scenarios, which
are subsequently transferred to Sionna for dataset generation
via ray tracing (RT). Note that all selected areas represent
typical urban macro-cell or micro-cell scenarios with varying
building shapes, quantities, and distributions, thereby ensuring
strong data diversity to support model training and facilitate
the evaluation of generalization capability.
To facilitate our experiments, the BS is randomly deployed
in the target region with NBS = 64, and the LAV ﬂight
altitudes are conﬁned to 25−80 m. CF measurement data Ggro
are uniformly sampled at a height of 1.5 m with a resolution
of 1 m. Note that there exists an inherent resolution-accuracy-
complexity trade-off: enhanced near-ground sampling density
improves the accuracy of 3D-CF construction, but increases
the computational complexity. Hence, the resolution of Ggro
should be determined based on practical limitations in real-
world scenarios. Based on the speciﬁc interface for wireless
communication simulation in Sionna, we conduct ray tracing
to obtain all possible LOS and NLOS paths between BS and
LAVs, establish the channel model in accordance with (1),
compute RSS according to (7), and construct 3D-CF by (8).
To further enhance the stability of network training, we adopt
the “max-min” linear normalization to scale the raw RSS in
3D-CF into [0, 1], which is given by
g′
m = max

gm −gthr
(gm)max −gthr
, 0

,
(23)
where gthr is the RSS threshold since signals below gthr
are practically undetectable by LAV in real-world scenarios
[59]. Additional parameters used to generate the datasets are
displayed in Table I.
TABLE I
PARAMETERS USED TO GENERATE DATASETS IN THE PLATFORM OF
SIONNA.
Parameters
Value
Communication scenario
urban macro-cell / micro-cell
Size of the target region
256 × 256
Number of antenna elements for BS
64
BS height
25 m
LAV ﬂight altitudes
25 −80 m
Sampling height of Ggro
1.5 m
Carrier frequency
3.5 GHz
Maximum number of paths
5
RSS threshold
−147 dB
Transmit power
23 dBm
B. Experiment Setup
In correspondence with the 3D-CF multimodal framework
in Section III, we conﬁgure all hyper-parameters of the three
modules in Table II. Speciﬁcally, regarding the Corr-MMF
module, the batch size is set to be 128 and the epochs are
60, with the learning rate programmed to be 0.0001 for the
ﬁrst 35 epochs and then linearly decaying to zero. For the
MMR module, the training epochs are set to be 60, and the
learning rate is initialized at 0.001 for the ﬁrst 35 epochs and
subsequently reduced linearly to zero. The training process
of the CSI-R module requires 15 epochs with a reduced batch
size of 32. The learning rate is set to be 0.0001 for the ﬁrst 10
epochs, followed by a linear decay to zero. All the simulations
are implemented by TensorFlow, with the computer equipped
with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-12700 and a GeForce GTX
4090.
To evaluate the performance of the proposed multimodal
framework in 3D-CF construction, we employ the mean ab-
solute error (MAE) and root mean square error (RMSE) as
metrics, which can be expressed as
MAE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
|˜g′
m −g′
m|,
(24)
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
n
n
X
i=1
(˜g′m −g′m)2,
(25)
where ˜g′
m is the predicted RSS in CSI-tuples in 3D-CF. Since
MAE provides equal weights to all errors, it can intuitively re-
ﬂect the overall 3D-CF construction performance. Conversely,
RMSE exhibits greater sensitivity to outliers, facilitating the
detection of extreme prediction deviations in our proposed
3D-CF multimodal framework. The combination of these
two metrics enables a more comprehensive evaluation of the
experimental results.
TABLE II
HYPER-PARAMETERS OF CORR-MMF, MMR, AND CSI-R MODULES IN
3D-CF MULTIMODAL FRAMEWORK.
Parameter
Module
Corr-MMF
MMR
CSI-R
Epochs
60
50
15
Delay Epochs
35
35
10
Learning Rate
0.005
0.001
0.0001
Batch Size
128
128
32
Optimizer
Adam
C. Inﬂuence of λ in the Corr-MMF module
In Corr-MMF module, λ would inﬂuence the network
performance by controlling the proportions among different
losses. Therefore, in this section, we examine its impact on
the 3D-CF construction error and analyze its effect on the
convergence behavior of the Corr-MMF module.
0
0.5
1
1.5
5
10
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
MAE/RMSE
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Correlation
0.036
0.032
0.029
0.034
0.035
0.039
MAE
RMSE
Correlation
0.068
0.066
0.063
0.063
0.069
19.8%
89.6%
99.9%
99.9%
97.9%
87.6%
0.060
Fig. 6: MAE and RMSE performance of the 3D-CF multimodal framework
under different λ.
As shown in Fig. 6, the proposed multimodal framework can
achieve the minimal 3D-CF construction error at λ = 1, with
MAE = 0.029 and RMSE = 0.060, capturing approximately
89.6% of the correlation between Eh and Ggro. As λ gradually
decreases, the weight of Lcorr(ϑ) reduces and the 3D-CF
construction error increases progressively. Notably at λ = 0,
the performance of MAE and RMSE deteriorates by 24.1%
and 15% respectively, with captured correlation between Eh
and Ggro dropping to 19.8%. In practice, an excessively
small λ will prevent the Corr-MMF module from extracting
correlated features between Eh and Ggro, thereby disabling
the operation of feature fusion and degrading the construction
performance of the proposed 3D-CF multimodal framework.
Similarly, as λ increases, the weight of Lcorr(ϑ) rises and
the performance of 3D-CF construction declines. Especially at
λ = 10, where λLcorr(ϑ) can be considered inﬁnite compared
with the magnitude of other losses, the performance of MAE
and RMSE deteriorates by 34.4% and 13.3%, respectively.
Here, an excessively large λ will unreasonably overemphasize
the correlation between Eh and Ggro (capturing as much as
99.9%), completely suppressing their distinctive features and
leading to a collapse of the Corr-MMF module. To conclude,
the determination of λ must strike an effective balance between
distinctive feature extraction and correlated feature fusion,
thus optimizing the performance of Corr-MMF module and
achieving accurate 3D-CF construction.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Epochs
0.05
0.07
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
4
6
MSE
Fig. 7: The convergence behavior of the validation loss for the Corr-MMF
module under different λ.
Fig. 7 presents the convergence behavior of the validation
loss for the Corr-MMF module under different λ. A fun-
damental observation is that larger λ corresponds to greater
λLcorr(ϑ), consequently resulting in higher values of the
objective function Lobj(ϑ). Nevertheless, the validation loss is
lower when λ = 1 compared to λ = 0.5, which demonstrates
that λ = 1 can optimize the network performance to the
greatest extent. This result is consistent with the conclusion
obtained in Fig. 6. Furthermore, smaller λ leads to smoother
loss curves and contributes to a more stable network training,
whereas larger λ results in greater ﬂuctuations. This occurs
because smaller λ balances the magnitudes of different losses,
enabling steadier execution of the gradient descent algorithm.
Conversely, larger λ causes Lcorr(ϑ) to be more dominant,
making the network signiﬁcantly more susceptible to its os-
cillation and hence resulting in ﬂuctuations across different
epochs. To conclude, variations in λ substantially impact the
stability of network training.
D. Evaluation of the 3D-CF Construction Performance
In this section, we compare the performance of the proposed
3D-CF multimodal framework with four benchmarks and
evaluate the generalization capability under different scenarios.
1) Benchmarks: To evaluate the performance of our pro-
posed 3D-CF multimodal framework, the Kriging interpolation
[16], GPR [17], GAN [30], and FL [72] are adopted as
benchmarks.
• Kriging interpolation [16]: Kriging is a classical inter-
polation method for constructing 3D-CF. Based on the
prior sampling data, it achieves RSS estimation at arbi-
trary locations by incorporating distances and modeling
3D spatial correlation through different variograms. The
Kriging interpolation method does not require a grid-
based model for CF, thus making the ﬂexible 3D-CF
construction possible.
• GPR [17]: Gaussian process regression is a widely used
statistical non-parametric model for 3D-CF construction.
It can construct the optimal approximator of RSS dis-
tribution by designing speciﬁc kernel functions based
on signal propagation characteristics. This GPR-based
method does not require the grid-based model as well,
therefore making the 3D-CF construction more ﬂexible.
• GAN [30]: Generative adversarial network is a signiﬁcant
deep generative model employed for 3D-CF construc-
tion. Unlike the Kriging-based method and GPR-based
method, GAN perceives the communication environment
and utilizes it as conditional information to generate
3D-CF. However, it requires the grid-based model to
represent CF as a multi-channel image, which necessitates
a uniform partitioning of the target area and assigns the
same RSS for all LAVs within the same grid, resulting
in lower accuracy and reduced ﬂexibility.
• FL [72]: Federated learning represents a state-of the-
art framework to recover 3D-CF. Embedded with deep
neural networks, it enables the collaborative utilization
of data from multiple LAVs to establish the global 3D-
CF. Since the regression-based FL framework requires
no special assumptions about the CF model, it balances
both accuracy and ﬂexibility in the process of 3D-CF
construction.
The sampling rate for Kriging interpolation and GPR is set
to be 5%, while the training, validation, and test datasets are
identical for all other ML-based methods.
2) Comparison to Different Benchmarks: Table III presents
the comparison of 3D-CF construction performance between
the proposed multimodal framework and the four other base-
lines. Compared to the non-AI methods like Kriging interpo-
lation [16] and GPR [17], the 3D-CF multimodal framework
demonstrates a reduction in RMSE by factors of 7.5 and 4.9,
respectively, and a decrease in MAE by factors of 10.6 and 5.1,
respectively, signiﬁcantly enhancing the accuracy of 3D-CF
construction. Fundamentally, the Kriging-based method and
GPR merely ﬁt the data itself without exploring the impact of
(a) 3D-CF for scenario 1.
(b) 3D-CF for scenario 2.
(c) 3D-CF for scenario 3.
(d) 3D-CF for scenario 4.
Fig. 8: Illustrations of 3D-CF under four randomly selected communication scenarios. The RSS distribution at four horizontal planes, speciﬁcally at heights
of 10 m, 20 m, 30 m, and 40 m, are illustrated along the Z axis.
TABLE III
COMPARISON OF THE 3D-CF MULTIMODAL FRAMEWORK WITH STATE-OF-THE-ART APPROACHES UNDER DIFFERENT COMMUNICATION SCENARIOS
REGARDING THE RMSE AND MAE PERFORMANCE.
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Scenario 4
RMSE
MAE
RMSE
MAE
RMSE
MAE
RMSE
MAE
Kriging [16]
0.522
0.467
0.348
0.287
0.340
0.289
0.459
0.384
GPR [17]
0.343
0.223
0.291
0.201
0.304
0.161
0.325
0.194
GAN [30]
0.234
0.195
0.208
0.156
0.269
0.221
0.266
0.223
Federated Learning [72]
0.088
0.067
0.041
0.034
0.035
0.029
0.056
0.039
Multimodal framework (ours)
0.069↓
0.044 ↓
0.026 ↓
0.019 ↓
0.024 ↓
0.021 ↓
0.045 ↓
0.027 ↓
communication environments on channel characteristics. Par-
ticularly in low-altitude airspace, where the physical environ-
ments become more complex, pure data ﬁtting is no longer suf-
ﬁcient to accurately predict the distribution of channel infor-
mation. Secondly, compared to the classical generative model
GAN [30], the proposed multimodal framework can achieve
3.4-fold and 4.4-fold performance advantages in RMSE and
MAE metrics, respectively. One point should be noted that
in low-altitude airspace, the physical environment comprises
different data modalities in horizontal and vertical dimensions,
with LAV coordinates evolving into ternary arrays. Since GAN
in [30] is limited to processing merely single-modal data,
the 3D-CF construction accuracy is inevitably compromised.
Moreover, the adoption of GAN needs to model 3D-CF as
images, resulting in a rigid and inﬂexible construction and
cannot achieve the non-uniform density adaptation accord-
ing to practical communication requirements. Our proposed
multimodal framework effectively addresses these limitations,
thereby signiﬁcantly reducing 3D-CF construction errors and
enhancing ﬂexibility. Finally, compared to the state-of-the-art
method, the proposed multimodal framework still outperforms
the FL-based approach [72] by 27.5% and 52.2% in terms
of the RMSE and MAE, respectively. This stems from the
operation of feature extraction and feature fusion for diverse
data modalities via Corr-MMF module and MMR module,
which enables the ﬁnal regression network to comprehensively
learn the mapping relationship between LAV’s positions and
its RSS. To conclude, owing to the CSI-tuples-based model
and the module-based design, the proposed multimodal frame-
work exhibits superior performance and high ﬂexibility in 3D-
CF construction.
3) Comparison Under Different Scenarios: Fig. 8 presents
the 3D-CF across four randomly selected communication
scenarios with different urban structures or building densities.
For illustrative purposes only, the RSS distribution across
four horizontal planes at 10 m, 20 m, 30 m, and 40 m is
given along the Zaxis. Table III provides the comparison of
RMSE and MAE performance across these scenarios. It can be
observed that, regardless of the scenario, our proposed mul-
timodal framework can always achieve 3D-CF construction
with smaller errors than the baselines, demonstrating its gen-
eralization ability with RMSE and MAE standard deviations
of 0.0012 and 0.0014, respectively.
E. Ablation Experiments
In this subsection, we conduct two ablation experiments to
respectively demonstrate the contributions of different input
modalities and attention mechanisms to the proposed 3D-CF
multimodal framework.
1) Input Modality: Table IV presents the contribution of
each input modality to the proposed 3D-CF multimodal frame-
work. Firstly, when Ev is missing, the model fails to learn the
vertical signal-propagation characteristics, leading to a rapid
performance deterioration. This outcome indicates that the
construction of 3D-CF must account for the three-dimensional
nature of the low-altitude environment. If existing 2D-CF con-
struction methods are directly applied to low-altitude scenarios
that only consider the horizontal building distribution, severe
model mismatch will arise. Secondly, when both Eh and Ggro
are missing, the model cannot learn the horizontal characteris-
tics of the CSI distribution, leading to signiﬁcant degradation
in model performance as well. However, when only one of
them is missing, the 3D-CF constructed by the proposed
architecture experiences only a 4.4% drop in performance.
In practice, both horizontal environmental information and
near-ground measurements can reﬂect the signal-propagation
characteristics in the horizontal direction, and the absence of
either alone does not cause model collapse.
TABLE IV
CONTRIBUTION OF EACH INPUT MODALITY TO THE 3D-CF MULTIMODAL
FRAMEWORK.
Geographic environments E
Measurements Ggro
Evaluation metrics
Eh
Ev
RMSE
MAE
!
!
!
0.045
0.027
!
!
%
0.047
0.028
%
!
!
0.047
0.029
!
%
!
0.687
0.675
%
%
!
0.700
0.692
In summary, the ablation study on input modalities demon-
strates the effectiveness and necessity of each type of prior
information, thereby validating the rationality of our proposed
3D-CF multimodal framework.
2) Attention Mechanisms: Table V presents the impact of
three different attention mechanisms, including TAM, CAM,
and SAM, on the 3D-CF construction. Firstly, the model
performance deteriorates severely when the TAM is removed,
whereas the degradation is less pronounced when the CAM
or SAM is removed. In principle, the TAM operates directly
on the inputs, primarily strengthening the near-ground mea-
surement data near the LAV projection. In contrast, the CAM
and SAM function internally within the network, emphasizing
key features through self-learning. Once the TAM is absent,
the data itself lacks essential weighting, leading to severe
performance degradation regardless of the internal network
design. Secondly, the performance decline in the absence of
CAM is less severe than that when the SAM is missing. Since
both the CAM and TAM are mechanisms within the Corr-
MMF module, even if CAM is removed, the TAM mechanism
still enables this module to achieve a relatively effective
training result.
TABLE V
ABLATION STUDY ON DIFFERENT ATTENTION MECHANISMS FOR 3D-CF
CONSTRUCTION.
Corr-MMF module
MMR module
Evaluation metrics
CAM
TAM
SAM
RMSE
MAE
!
!
!
0.045
0.027
%
!
!
0.065
0.052
!
%
!
0.546
0.455
!
!
%
0.290
0.282
In summary, the ablation study on attention mechanisms
demonstrates that all TAM, CAM, and SAM play indispens-
able roles in the proposed multimodal framework, enabling
the accurate and efﬁcient 3D-CF construction.
F. Complexity Comparison
In this subsection, we analyze the complexity of the pro-
posed 3D-CF multimodal framework versus benchmarks and
present comparative results of their inference times.
Kriging
GPR
GAN
FL
Proposed scheme
2.5
10
15
25
35
45
Inference time (s)
42.73
18.17
2.81
5.18
3.06
Fig. 9: Comparison of the 3D-CF inference time between the proposed
multimodal framework and state-of-the-art approaches.
Deﬁne N as the amount of training data. For the Kriging-
based method, we must solve the Kriging system of equations
with a size of N × N to complete the construction of 3D-
CF, the complexity of which remains O(N 3) even when
employing the Cholesky decomposition [73]. For the GPR-
based method, the complexity of covariance matrix inver-
sion is O(N 2), and the complexity of marginal likelihood
approximation in the process of solving posterior proba-
bility is O(N). Consequently, the overall complexity for
the GPR-based 3D-CF construction is O(N 3) [74]. For the
GAN-based approach, its complexity can be expressed as
PLGAN
ℓ=1
Oℓ(NCℓ−1HℓWℓCℓK2
ℓ), where LGAN is the number
of convolution layers, Kℓis size of the convolution kernel, and
Hℓ, Wℓ, and Cℓare heights, widths, and channels of the ℓ-th
layer’s output, respectively. For the FL-based approach which
is mainly composed of the multilayer perceptron, its complex-
ity is given by PPFL
p=1 O(Ndphp), where PFL is the number
of hidden layers, dp is the input dimension and hp represents
the number of neurons in the p-th hidden layer. Regarding
our proposed 3D-CF multimodal framework, its complexity
is the sum of complexities from all three modules, which
is
given
by
PLCorrMMF+LMMR
ℓ=1
O(NCℓ−1HℓWℓCℓK2
ℓ) +
PPCSIR
p=1
O(Ndphp), where the ﬁrst term contains both the
Corr-MMF module and MMR module due to their similar
network structures.
Fig. 9 further presents the inference time of 3D-CF con-
struction for different methods. As observed, the proposed
multimodal framework signiﬁcantly reduces the inference time
compared to the Kriging-based and GPR-based methods. It
also achieves lower construction errors and enhanced ﬂexibil-
ity with comparable time complexity compared with the GAN-
based approach. Relative to the state-of-the-art FL algorithm,
the proposed scheme nearly halves the computational time. It
should be emphasized that the proposed 3D-CF is designed
to be trained, inferred, and deployed at the BS side. Given
the abundant computational resources available at the BS, this
framework is practical.
To conclude, our multimodal framework exhibits competi-
tive advantages in computational complexity, indicating great
potential for practical applications.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a modularized multimodal frame-
work to construct 3D-CF for low-altitude communications.
Firstly, we established the 3D-CF model based on the ground-
to-LAV Rician fading channels, which were deﬁned as a
collection of CSI-tuples with each tuple composed of LAV’s
positions and its corresponding channel information. Due to
the heterogeneous structures of different prior data such as
LAV coordinates, geographic environment maps, and sampling
data, we transformed the 3D-CF construction problem into
a multimodal regression task and proposed a high-efﬁciency
modularized multimodal framework accordingly, where the
Corr-MMF module and the MMR module were designed to
extract features of CSI distribution in horizontal and vertical
directions, and the CSI-R module was developed to estimate
the target CSI and reconstruct the 3D-CF. Numerical results
demonstrated the competitive performance and generalization
ability of our proposed 3D-CF multimodal framework, which
attains an accuracy improvement of at least 27.5% over the
benchmarks under different communication scenarios. We
also analyzed the computational complexity and illustrated
its superiority in terms of the inference time. In the future,
it will be interesting to quantify the impact of measurement
data resolution on the constructed 3D-CF accuracy and its
computational complexity. Furthermore, considering air-to-air
channels and dynamic environmental factors also constitutes
a highly promising research direction for low-altitude 3D-CF
techniques.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Xie, L. You, R. Chen, G. He, and X. Gao, “MML-based 3D channel
ﬁngerprints construction for low-altitude communications,” in in Proc.
IEEE WCNC 2026, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, Apr. 2026, pp. 1–6.
[2] H. Zhang, Z. Han, G. C. Alexandropoulos, and N. H. Tran, “Special
issue on aerial access networks for 6G,” Journal of Communications
and Networks, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 121–124, Apr. 2022.
[3] C. Xu, X. Liao, J. Tan, H. Ye, and H. Lu, “Recent research progress of
unmanned aerial vehicle regulation policies and technologies in urban
low altitude,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 74 175–74 194, Apr. 2020.
[4] N. Hossein Motlagh, T. Taleb, and O. Arouk, “Low-altitude unmanned
aerial vehicles-based internet of things services: Comprehensive survey
and future perspectives,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 3, no. 6, pp.
899–922, Dec. 2016.
[5] H. Kang, J. Joung, J. Kim, J. Kang, and Y. S. Cho, “Protect your sky:
A survey of counter unmanned aerial vehicle systems,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 168 671–168 710, Sep. 2020.
[6] X. Ye, Y. Mao, X. Yu, S. Sun, L. Fu, and J. Xu, “Integrated sensing
and communications for low-altitude economy: A deep reinforcement
learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., pp. 1–1, 2025.
[7] S. Shao, W. Zhu, and Y. Li, “Radar detection of low-slow-small UAVs
in complex environments,” in in Proc. IEEE ITAIC 2022, vol. 10,
Chongqing, China, Jun. 2022, pp. 1153–1157.
[8] J. Li, L. Yang, W. Hao, I. Ahmad, H. Liu, F. Shu, and D. Niyato,
“Multi-layer transmitting RIS-aided receiver for collaborative jamming
and anti-jamming networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 24,
no. 8, pp. 6518–6534, Aug. 2025.
[9] J. Li, C. Zhou, J. Liu, M. Sheng, N. Zhao, and Y. Su, “Reinforcement
learning-based resource allocation for coverage continuity in high dy-
namic UAV communication networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 848–860, Feb. 2024.
[10] Y. Zeng and X. Xu, “Toward environment-aware 6G communications
via channel knowledge map,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 28, no. 3,
pp. 84–91, Jun. 2021.
[11] H. B. Yilmaz, T. Tugcu, F. Alagz, and S. Bayhan, “Radio environment
map as enabler for practical cognitive radio networks,” IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 162–169, Dec. 2013.
[12] H. Che, L. You, J. Wang, Z. Jin, C. Xie, and X. Gao, “Channel
charting-assisted non-orthogonal pilot allocation for uplink XL-MIMO
transmission,” Chin. J. Electron., 2025 (early access).
[13] D. Wu, Y. Zeng, S. Jin, and R. Zhang, “Environment-aware hybrid
beamforming by leveraging channel knowledge map,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 4990–5005, May 2024.
[14] L. Zhao, Z. Fei, X. Wang, J. Huang, Y. Li, and Y. Zhang, “IMNet:
Interference-aware channel knowledge map construction and localiza-
tion,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 856–860, Mar.
2025.
[15] J. Wang, Z. Lin, Q. Zhu, Q. Wu, T. Lan, Y. Zhao, Y. Bai, and W. Zhong,
“3D spectrum mapping and reconstruction under multi-radiation source
scenarios,” China Commun., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 20–34, Mar. 2024.
[16] A. Ivanov, K. Tonchev, V. Poulkov, A. Manolova, and A. Vlahov,
“Interpolation accuracy evaluation for 3D radio environment maps
construction,” in IEEE Int. Symp. Wireless Pers. Multimedia Commun.
(WPMC), Tampa, FL, United states, Nov. 2023, pp. 1–7.
[17] X. Chen, X. Zhong, Z. Zhang, L. Dai, and S. Zhou, “High-efﬁciency
urban 3D radio map estimation based on sparse measurements,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 10, pp. 16 488–16 493, Oct. 2025.
[18] J. Wang, Q. Zhu, Z. Lin, J. Chen, G. Ding, Q. Wu, G. Gu, and
Q. Gao, “Sparse Bayesian learning-based hierarchical construction for
3D radio environment maps incorporating channel shadowing,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 14 560–14 574, Oct. 2024.
[19] F. Shen, G. Ding, Q. Wu, and Z. Wang, “Compressed wideband spectrum
mapping in 3D spectrum-heterogeneous environment,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 72, no. 4, pp. 4875–4886, Apr. 2023.
[20] F. Shen, Z. Wang, G. Ding, K. Li, and Q. Wu, “3D compressed
spectrum mapping with sampling locations optimization in spectrum-
heterogeneous environment,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 21,
no. 1, pp. 326–338, Jan. 2022.
[21] Q. Wu, F. Shen, Z. Wang, and G. Ding, “3D spectrum mapping based
on ROI-driven UAV deployment,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 5, pp.
24–31, Oct. 2020.
[22] K. Yin, S. Fang, F. Chu, and Y. Fan, “Compressed tensor completion:
Approach for UAV-aided 3-D radio map construction,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 11, no. 24, pp. 40 516–40 531, Dec. 2024.
[23] H. Sun and J. Chen, “Energy-modiﬁed leverage sampling for radio map
construction via matrix completion,” IEEE Signal Process Lett., vol. 31,
pp. 1780–1784, Jun. 2024.
[24] C. Li, Z. Dou, and Y. Lin, “Fast 3-D radio map reconstruction via cross
tensor approximation,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 24, pp.
40 619–40 633, Dec. 2024.
[25] H. Sun and J. Chen, “Integrated interpolation and block-term tensor
decomposition for spectrum map construction,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 72, pp. 3896–3911, Aug. 2024.
[26] W. Liu and J. Chen, “UAV-aided radio map construction exploiting
environment semantics,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 9,
pp. 6341–6355, Sep. 2023.
[27] B. Li and J. Chen, “Radio map-assisted approach for interference-aware
predictive UAV communications,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 16 725–16 741, Nov. 2024.
[28] P. Zeng and J. Chen, “UAV-aided joint radio map and 3D environment
reconstruction using deep learning approaches,” in in Proc. IEEE ICC
2022, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, May 2022, pp. 5341–5346.
[29] S. Zhang, S. Jiang, W. Lin, Z. Fang, K. Liu, H. Zhang, and K. Chen,
“Generative AI on SpectrumNet: An open benchmark of multiband 3-D
radio maps,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Networking, vol. 11, no. 2,
pp. 886–901, Apr. 2025.
[30] T. Hu, Y. Huang, J. Chen, Q. Wu, and Z. Gong, “3D radio map re-
construction based on generative adversarial networks under constrained
aircraft trajectories,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 6, pp. 8250–
8255, Jun. 2023.
[31] X. Wang, Q. Zhang, N. Cheng, J. Chen, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, S. Cui, and
X. Shen, “RadioDiff-3D: A 3D 3D radio map dataset and generative
diffusion based benchmark for 6G environment-aware communication,”
IEEE Trans. Network Sci. Eng., pp. 1–18, 2025.
[32] C. Xie, L. You, Z. Jin, J. Tang, X. Gao, and X.-G. Xia, “CF-CGN:
Channel ﬁngerprints extrapolation for multi-band massive MIMO trans-
mission based on cycle-consistent generative networks,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 43, no. 11, pp. 3722 – 3736, Nov. 2025.
[33] Z. Jin, L. You, J. Wang, X.-G. Xia, and X. Gao, “An I2I inpainting
approach for efﬁcient channel knowledge map construction,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1415–1429, Feb. 2025.
[34] T. Wu, J. Liu, J. Liu, Z. Huang, H. Wu, C. Zhang, B. Bai, and G. Zhang,
“A novel AI-based framework for AoI-optimal trajectory planning in
UAV-assisted wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Com-
mun., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2462–2475, Apr. 2022.
[35] S. Kim, S. Jeong, J. Wu, B. Shim, and M. Z. Win, “Large multimodal
model-based environment-aware channel estimation,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 4059–4075, Dec. 2025.
[36] H. Shimomura, Y. Koda, T. Kanda, K. Yamamoto, T. Nishio, and
A. Taya, “Vision-aided frame-capture-based CSI recomposition for WiFi
sensing: A multimodal approach,” in in Proc. IEEE CCNC 2023, Las
Vegas, NV, USA, Jan. 2023, pp. 913–914.
[37] Z. Xin, Y. Liu, J. Xing, J. Huang, J. Bian, Z. Bai, and C. Wang,
“Multimodal fusion-based channel prediction and characterization for
mmWave UAV A2G communications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 74,
pp. 5089–5104, Feb. 2026.
[38] G. Charan, T. Osman, A. Hredzak, N. Thawdar, and A. Alkhateeb,
“Vision-position multi-modal beam prediction using real millimeter
wave datasets,” in in Proc. IEEE WCNC 2022, Austin, TX, USA, Apr.
2022, pp. 2727–2731.
[39] F. Jiang, Y. Peng, L. Dong, K. Wang, K. Yang, C. Pan, D. Niyato,
and O. A. Dobre, “Large language model enhanced multi-agent systems
for 6G communications,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 31, no. 6, pp.
48–55, Dec. 2024.
[40] H. Kim, T. Roh, and B. Shim, “Multi-modal sensing-aided beam man-
agement for 6G communication systems,” in in Proc. IEEE VTC2024-
Fall, Washington, DC, USA, Oct. 2024, pp. 1–5.
[41] Y. Ahn, J. Kim, S. Kim, K. Shim, J. Kim, S. Kim, and B. Shim, “Toward
intelligent millimeter and terahertz communication for 6G: Computer
vision-aided beamforming,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 30, no. 5, pp.
179–186, Oct. 2023.
[42] Y. Yang, F. Gao, C. Xing, J. An, and A. Alkhateeb, “Deep multimodal
learning: Merging sensory data for massive MIMO channel prediction,”
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1885–1898, Jul. 2021.
[43] Z. Jin, L. You, D. Wing Kwan Ng, X.-G. Xia, and X. Gao, “Near-ﬁeld
channel estimation for XL-MIMO: A deep generative model guided by
side information,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Networking, vol. 12,
pp. 628–643, May 2025.
[44] Z. Wen, G. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Li, and S. Han, “A multi-modal learning
framework for MIMO channel information acquisition,” in in Proc. IEEE
ICCC 2024, Chengdu, China, Dec. 2024, pp. 2393–2399.
[45] F. Jiang, L. Dong, Y. Peng, K. Wang, K. Yang, C. Pan, and X. You,
“Large AI model empowered multimodal semantic communications,”
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 76–82, Jan. 2025.
[46] J. Li, L. Yang, C. You, I. Ahmad, P. S. Bithas, M. Di Renzo, and
D. Niyato, “Absorptive RIS-assisted near-ﬁeld covert communication
with ﬂuid antenna systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 44, pp.
2052–2070, Dec. 2025.
[47] J. Li, Q. Pan, Z. Wan, P. Zhu, D. Wang, M. Lou, J. Jin, F. Liu, and
X. You, “Low altitude 3-D coverage performance analysis of cell-free
RAN for 6G systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 12, pp.
16 163–16 176, Dec. 2023.
[48] F. Jiang and A. L. Swindlehurst, “Optimization of UAV heading for the
ground-to-air uplink,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 30, no. 5, pp.
993–1005, Jun. 2012.
[49] H. Li, L. Ding, Y. Wang, and Z. Wang, “Air-to-ground channel modeling
and performance analysis for cellular-connected UAV swarm,” IEEE
Commun. Lett., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 2172–2176, Aug. 2023.
[50] J. Tang, X. Gao, L. You, D. Shi, J. Yang, X.-G. Xia, X. Zhao,
and P. Jiang, “Massive MIMO-OFDM channel acquisition with time-
frequency phase-shifted pilots,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 73, no. 6,
pp. 4520–4535, Jun. 2025.
[51] Y. Zhu, L. You, Q. Kong, G. Seco-Granados, and X. Gao, “Robust
precoding for massive MIMO LEO satellite localization systems,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 3434–3438, Feb. 2025.
[52] M. Qian, L. You, X.-G. Xia, and X. Gao, “On the spectral efﬁciency
of multi-user holographic MIMO uplink transmission,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 15 421–15 434, Oct. 2024.
[53] Y. Ye, L. You, J. Wang, H. Xu, K.-K. Wong, and X. Gao, “Fluid antenna-
assisted MIMO transmission exploiting statistical CSI,” IEEE Commun.
Lett., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 223–227, Jan. 2024.
[54] H. Li, Y. Wang, C. Sun, and Z. Wang, “User-centric cell-free massive
MIMO for IoT in highly dynamic environments,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 8658–8675, Mar. 2024.
[55] H. Chang, J. Bian, C.-X. Wang, Z. Bai, W. Zhou, and e.-H. M. Aggoune,
“A 3D non-stationary wideband GBSM for low-altitude UAV-to-ground
V2V MIMO channels,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 70 719–70 732, May
2019.
[56] M. Cardone, A. Dytso, and C. Rush, “Entropic central limit theorem for
order statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 2193–2205,
Apr. 2023.
[57] K. Suto, S. Bannai, K. Sato, K. Inage, K. Adachi, and T. Fujii,
“Image-driven spatial interpolation with deep learning for radio map
construction,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 1222–
1226, Jun. 2021.
[58] G. Chen, Y. Liu, T. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Guo, and J. Yang, “A
graph neural network based radio map construction method for urban
environment,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 1327–1331, May
2023.
[59] R. Levie, C¸ . Yapar, G. Kutyniok, and G. Caire, “RadioUNet: Fast
radio map estimation with convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 4001–4015, Jun. 2021.
[60] D. Ramachandram and G. W. Taylor, “Deep multimodal learning: A
survey on recent advances and trends,” IEEE Signal Process Mag.,
vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 96–108, Nov. 2017.
[61] S. Jabeen, X. Li, M. S. Amin, O. E. F. Bourahla, S. Li, and A. Jabbar,
“A review on methods and applications in multimodal deep learning,”
ACM Trans. Multimedia Comput. Commun. Appl., vol. 19, pp. 1– 41,
Feb. 2022.
[62] G. Joshi, R. Walambe, and K. Kotecha, “A review on explainability in
multimodal deep neural nets,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 59 800–59 821,
Mar. 2021.
[63] C. Yin, Z. Xiao, X. Cao, X. Xi, P. Yang, and D. Wu, “Ofﬂine and
online search: UAV multiobjective path planning under dynamic urban
environment,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 546–558, Apr.
2018.
[64] H. Lei, Y. Yan, J. Liu, Q. Han, and Z. Li, “Hierarchical multi-UAV path
planning for urban low altitude environments,” IEEE Access, vol. 12,
pp. 162 109–162 121, Oct. 2024.
[65] D. Wu, Y. Qiu, Y. Zeng, and F. Wen, “Environment-aware channel
estimation via integrating channel knowledge map and dynamic sensing
information,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 3608–
3612, Dec. 2024.
[66] J. Song, R. He, Z. Zhang, M. Yang, B. Ai, H. Zhang, and R. Chen, “3D
environment reconstruction based on ISAC channels,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Ubiquitous Commun. (Ucom), Xi’an, China, Jul. 2024, pp.
487–491.
[67] W. Liu and J. Chen, “UAV-aided radio map construction exploiting
environment semantics,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 9,
pp. 6341–6355, Sep. 2023.
[68] Z. Cui, C. Briso-Rodr´ıguez, K. Guan, ˙l. G¨uvenc¸, and Z. Zhong, “Wide-
band air-to-ground channel characterization for multiple propagation
environments,” IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett., vol. 19, no. 9, pp.
1634–1638, Sep. 2020.
[69] S. Woo, J. Park, J.-Y. Lee, and I. S. Kweon, “CBAM: Convolutional
block attention module,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV),
Munich, Germany, Sep. 2018, pp. 3–19.
[70] J. Hoydis, F. A. Aoudia, S. Cammerer, M. Nimier-David, N. Binder,
G. Marcus, and A. Keller, “Sionna RT: Differentiable ray tracing for
radio propagation modeling,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC
Wkshps), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, Dec. 2023, pp. 317–321.
[71] M. Haklay and P. Weber, “OpenStreetMap: User-generated street maps,”
IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 12–18, Dec. 2008.
[72] Q. Gong, F. Wu, D. Yang, L. Xiao, and Z. Liu, “3D radio map
reconstruction and trajectory optimization for cellular-connected UAVs,”
J. Commun. Inf. Networks, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 357–368, Dec. 2023.
[73] K. Sato and T. Fujii, “Kriging-based interference power constraint:
Integrated design of the radio environment map and transmission power,”
IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Networking, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 13–25, Mar.
2017.
[74] P. Zhen, B. Zhang, Y.-Q. Xu, Z. Chen, H. Wang, and D. Guo, “Radio
environment map construction based on Gaussian process with positional
uncertainty,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 1639–
1643, Aug. 2022.
