Enes Causal Discovery
Alexis Kafantaris
March 2026
Abstract
This paper is about a neural evolutionary method that is meant to address
causal discovery. Furthermore, an interesting approach is implemented to train
and evaluate a MoE and compare it to baseline causal discovery algorithms;
this approach exploits the MoE’s ability to learn both linear and nonlinear
distributions of causal relationships among pairs of graph nodes and classify
them. More specifically, the Enes(Edge node edge similarity) program, uses a
mixture of experts neural net to determine the graph edge-node-edge triplet
class from random non linear generated SEM; this way training is achieved
in respect to causal pattern. The model inputs are graphs and their outputs
are predictions regarding the triplet patterns and that is essentially the causal
map for the problem, the penalties used are DAG enforcement penalty, and
Pearson correlation penalty. In addition, this architecture is evaluated using
the linear Pearson coefficient baseline as well as other state of the art solutions.
Nonetheless, the primary focus is the sachs dataset, but then Michaelis-Menten
dynamics is used in order to determine efficiency and scalability. Finally the
model when compared with a statistical and a constrained programming baseline
and it produces good results that indicate that it is performing in a stable and
efficient way.
1
arXiv:2603.24436v1  [cs.NE]  25 Mar 2026
1
Introduction
This paper is about a highly sophisticated architecture that addresses causal
discovery using a neural net; the architecture is both robust and well performing.
To begin with, causal discovery on sachs dataset is one interesting as well as
classical problem.
Causal discovery has many real life applications, such as
finding the ground truth in service design processes. Nevertheless, starting it
makes more sense to try and generalize from sachs data to other problems due
to the complexity and the nature of it.
Determining the model is also important, as there are various tools that solve
observational causal discovery and are also considered SOTA; most of them are
not neural nets. In this particular instance, a neural net is used although it is
rarely considered the best alternative due to the lack of formal training data.
More specifically, causal discovery is observational and interventional; however,
using random noise seems to suffice. Moreover, the model is a mixture of experts
which has excellent modularizing capabilities.
In case of interventional data, the model would be trained to understand
patterns within a given context of interventions. That is not the case, as here
randomly generated data and some MM dynamics have been used in order to
identify the sachs protein and other MM dynamics data.
Furthermore, the
model is used to classify the sachs data both real and artificial. The results are
evaluated and, compared to some baselines, they are good.
Lastly, the situation is analyzed and a brief discussion about the setup as
well as the results explains the technical aspect of that venture. The paper is
analyzed as follows, section two is the literature review, thereafter, the method
and the model are described in section three, and the results are presented in
section four, finally section five is the conclusion.
2
2
Literature Review
There are many programs used for causal discovery. Ranging from a simple
Pearson coefficient[6], to more complicated programs[3] to even more sophisti-
cated neural nets[10]. An attempt is made every-time to determine the causal
edges of a difficult and complicated graph[4]. The graph describes a protein, a
biological entity that is astutely organized by nature. Emerging are some forms
of relationships, i.e. causal relationships, and these can be further examined;
moreover, causal relationships can be classified to determine which edges are
related and which are not.
To achieve causal discovery, one needs to provide a graph as input and
determine some relationships. And the observational approach has been used,
as the main focus is the Karen Sachs benchmark[4]. There are other objectives in
mind, like discovering the silver standard ground in service design datasets but
these are secondary. In other words, this model does not know anything about
the real data, so it uses or some math in order to determine causal relationships
among the nodes-edges.
Additionally, many other approaches have been implemented, especially sta-
tistical algorithms like PC[9], or mathematical algorithms like NOTEARS[3].
From these and others, it seems like the best alternative is a fast tool with no
induction base. Although, there are notably machine learning models and neural
networks for causal discovery, presumably both interventional and observational[10],
there are few specific systems[13][14]. Moreover, only recently[14] has the in-
duction base been addressed using the notears formula and a neural net.
One of the major issues that arise is the data; usually the saying garbage in
garbage out refers to a model where the training occurs with poor data. How-
ever, in the scheme of observational causal discovery the GIGO is unavoidable.
For this reason a point is made to obtain at least partially useful induction
basis, due to the fact that an induction basis has its merits[14]. Here training
a neuron for data similarity makes absolute sense as according to the actual
experiment[4] there are similar motifs to be found.
Furthermore scaling is an issue[3]; although the notears method for works it
struggles due to the mathematical overhead. While on the other hand methods
like PC[9] an induction basis and hence scale but can be easily confused due to
their static nature. However, recently bridging this gap is the dagpa system[14]
that uses the trace objective and can be both scaled and perform well in real
datasets. A thorough system, however, would be better; when it comes to sys-
tems that are explainable, where the MoE architecture modularizes everything,
and is completely transparent.
The proposed architecture is a mixture of experts, which allows the model en-
tities, such as causal relationships, to be further parameterized[5]. More specif-
ically, an attempt is made to exploit a neural net, as implementing neurons
poses a great challenge for this dataset. To explain, a simple and fast Pearson
coefficient linear model usually achieves good scores. An aggressive baseline
that requires a really good model to overcome that is. Moreover, there are ma-
jor limitations when it comes to causal discovery of observational data. Unlike
3
the sachs[4] one did not use interventions but only prior knowledge; the most
prohibitive limitation is that of the data which is addressed.
3
Methodology
As mentioned above the proposed architecture is a mixture of experts physics
informed; a physics informed network[12] is a network that uses physical con-
straint as it’s core learning mechanism.
Moreover, to achieve the objective,
these constraints are merged in the training matrix. In addition, this network
has also penalized the constraint as it was found to produce more stable and
robust results this way[5]. There are three primary similarities, which govern
the physics of the network, namely cosine similarity, Pearson coefficient, and ad-
jacency matrix constraint. The model is, therefore, trying actively to minimize
the similarities, in both a linear and a non linear fashion, of an edge-node-edge
probe of the data.
One of the key advantages of this method is the induction basis; induction
allows faster inferences and scalability. However, there is a saying : garbage in
garbage out. Regarding causal discovery, one is confronted by GIGO when it
comes to training Enes. On the one hand, using relevant data is like cheating be-
cause the model knows where the patterns come from, which is interventional[4].
On the other hand, using other data is confounded; at least that is how obser-
vational classification has to be. Moreover, shapes and forms are generated and
a middle ground of some MM kinetics is also employed[15]. These are not fully
adopted to maintain the unbiased perspective of the program.
Lastly a case of stability during the training is made; the program is already
confronted by GIGO. There are also multiple objectives at hand and a compli-
cated fusion loss. In order to operate at its peak capacity stabilization during
its training would really help. For this reason Langevin dynamic and simulated
annealing optimization[16] are employed. This way the chaotic gradient descent
slope becomes more stable and more predictable allowing for higher precision.
A classifying task is at hand. The model is set up and the hyper-parameters
are optimized; it is a fast and a stable model called Enes. Now predictions will
be examined for both the sachs dataset and the MM kinetics, without changing
the unbiased data and using fully MM generator.
Following is a drawing of the neural net architecture:
4
Input: Raw Observational Triplet Xi,j,k ∈R3×T
Shared Feature Extraction
Expert A:
Non linear Expert
Expert B:
Linear Expert
Expert Gating Mechanism
Score = w · A + (1 −w) · B
Softmax Classification
Output: Causal Motif Prediction
Adjacency Constrain
W 2 Penalty
Pearson correlation
P (edge) · (1 −|r|)
Cosine Similarity
cos(θA,B) Consistency
Figure 1: Final architecture of the Enes Model. The model is comprised of a
dual expert architecture and graph metrics that are treated as the physics of
the network. It inputs graph nodes and outputs causal pattern classification.
4
Results and Discussion
The Enes model classifies edge node edge similarity based on GIGO data and
some MM that it has received during the training. The gigo can t get better
without cheating. For the evaluation part some the following metrics are defined;
5
Evaluation Metrics
TP =
X
i,j
I( ˆWi,j = Wi,j ̸= 0)
Prec =
TP
P I( ˆWi,j ̸= 0)
,
Rec =
TP
P I(Wi,j ̸= 0),
F1 = 2 · Prec · Rec
Prec + Rec
SHD =
X
i<j
I( ˆWi,j ̸= Wi,j ∨ˆWj,i ̸= Wj,i)
Acc = d2 −SHD
d2
, where d is the matrix dimension.
Each metric has its own significance; for causal discovery, one cares a lot about
SHD and precision. The lower the SHD the less mistakes it makes per graph,
while as for precision, the higher the precision is the better a model is at picking
up correct edges. Therefore, one cares about accuracy to; it can be stated that
the TP and the recall are not so important after all as the model does not know
the data a priori.
Following is the benchmark evaluation of the results: After a thorough eval-
Table 1: Performance and Scalability Metric Benchmark
Metric
11 Nodes (Sachs)
11 Nodes (MM)
25 Nodes (MM)
50 Nodes (MM)
Linear Fast Pearson
Accuracy
0.8694
0.8107
0.9526
0.9789
Precision
0.6223
0.5091
0.1889
0.2966
Recall
0.3294
0.2605
0.0708
0.0490
F1 Score
0.4308
0.3444
0.1030
0.0827
SHD
15.80
22.91
29.60
52.80
PC Algorithm
Accuracy
0.7025
0.8512
0.9360
0.9704
Precision
0.0870
0.3333
0.3621
0.3711
Recall
0.1176
0.8033
0.8710
0.7350
F1 Score
0.1000
0.4706
0.5122
0.4932
SHD
36.00
18.00
40.00
74.00
Enes
Accuracy
0.8818
0.8240
0.9614
0.9802
Precision
0.7214
0.6565
0.5333
0.5000
Recall
0.2706
0.2193
0.2834
0.1347
F1 Score
0.3939
0.3296
0.3598
0.2503
SHD
14.30
21.29
23.00
49.60
Table 1: Performance comparison. Precision, accuracy, recall, F1, and SHD are
evaluated. Three programs are used: Enes, PC, and linear pearson coefficient
as an objective baseline. Lastly, the evaluation is performed upon the real sachs
data and synthetic MM kinetics that are generated for three sizes.
uation, several good things can be seen. The model clearly outperforms the
linear baseline and the constrained based baseline in most respects. Clearly,
the model has better SHD which makes it more robust for observational causal
discovery. Make no mistake, both of these programs are highly performing base-
lines especially on their own accord, and achieving a better result is certainty
6
difficult. Furthermore, the recall index is not higher, which suggests that the
Enes Model cherry picks results.
The most interesting observation is the way the systems plateau; here it
is noted that for observational data classification these baselines are also con-
sidered state of the art. The metrics provided are well beyond expectations,
especially for the real dataset.
Considering the gigo premise that is, as one
would expect garbage outputs from the model. This was not the case, it is
attested that the data generation was attempted using only patterns for which
again the model performed similarly. However, data generation closer to other
systems was preferred due to its faster training potential.
It is argued that
random linear and non linear structural equation model data, random patterns,
and noise is not eventually bad data.
Another interesting note is about the baseline; historically the observational
sachs data seem to be modeled better using simple and linear methods[6]. So,
one would indeed expect neural networks to perform well, but they are not.
Many architectures were tested, including convolutional neural nets, all of which
exhibited the same trend; networks usually had higher accuracy but lower recall
and F1 score. However, the difference is more than noticeable, as this archi-
tecture was proved the best by empirical validation. Despite the lack of high
results in the MM dynamics, it still performed well enough.
5
Conclusion
It is noted here that this is a hybrid system, one can just change the training
data, and the model becomes fully tuned to the actual problem. That is another
topic, however, and it was avoiding because if that was the case the model would
be cheating. By using random generated data and preserving it through the
experiments the actual capabilities of the model were addressed for its capacity
to generalize based on similarity. One could also do a polynomial or a mutual
information comparison, and that did not come close to the baseline despite
being sound. Essentially, one replaced this polynomial with the global estimator
neural net and that worked.
Finally, it is important to address the elephant in the room, which is the
sachs protein dataset, byt the real reason this model exists is service design
processes ground truth retrieval. Having the ability to classify proteins is the
hardest causal discovery task, and if the model performed well enough in this
task, it would perform well enough in other tasks. Especially when the data
was tweaked; for this reason the MM dynamics evaluations were tested, but yet
again this could much better.
7
References
[1] Christina Heinze-Deml, Jonas Peters, and Nicolai Meinshausen. Causal dis-
covery from observational and interventional data across multiple environ-
ments. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Method-
ology), 83(4):747–772, 2021.
[2] Yuehua Zhu, Panayiotis V. Benos, and Maria Chikina. A hybrid constrained
continuous optimization approach for optimal causal discovery from biologi-
cal data. Bioinformatics, 36(8):2386–2394, 2020.
[3] Hairui Wang, Junming Li, and Gui Yang. A Data Feature Extraction Method
Based on the NOTEARS Causal Inference Algorithm. Applied Sciences,
2023.
[4] Sachs, Karen, Omar Perez, Dana Pe’er, Douglas A. Lauffenburger, and
Garry P. Nolan.
“Causal protein-signaling networks derived from multi-
parameter single-cell data.” Science 308, no. 5721 (2005): 523–529.
[5] Shazeer, N., Mirhoseini, A., Maziarz, K., Davis, A., Le, Q., Hinton, G.,
& Dean, J. (2017). Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated
mixture-of-experts layer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538.
[6] Margolin, Adam A., Ilya Nemenman, Katia Basso, Chris Wiggins, Gustavo
Stolovitzky, Riccardo Dalla Favera, and Andrea Califano. “ARACNE: an
algorithm for the reconstruction of gene regulatory networks in a mammalian
cellular context.” BMC bioinformatics 7, no. 1 (2006): S7.
[7] Shimizu, Shohei, Patrik O. Hoyer, Aapo Hyv¨arinen, and Antti Kerminen. “A
linear non-Gaussian acyclic model for causal discovery.” Journal of Machine
Learning Research 7, no. Oct (2006): 2003–2030.
[8] Zhang, Bin, and Steve Horvath. “A general framework for weighted gene co-
expression network analysis.” Statistical applications in genetics and molec-
ular biology 4, no. 1 (2005).
[9] Spirtes, Peter, and Clark Glymour. “An algorithm for fast recovery of sparse
causal graphs.” Social science computer review 9, no. 1 (1991): 62–72.
[10] Lopez-Paz,
David,
Robert
Nishihara,
Soumith
Chintala,
Bernhard
Sch¨olkopf, and L´eon Bottou. “Discovering causal signals in images.” Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pp. 3354–3363, 2017.
[11] Lewis, M., Ghazvininejad, M., Ghosh, G., Aghajanyan, A., Wang, S., &
Zettlemoyer, L. (2021). Base layers: Simplifying training of large, sparse
models. Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing (ICML), PMLR 139:6265-6274.
8
[12] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Physics-informed neural
networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse prob-
lems involving nonlinear partial differential equations,” Journal of Compu-
tational Physics, vol. 378, pp. 686–707, 2019.
[13] Lorch, L., Rothfuss, J., Sch¨olkopf, B., & Krause, A. (2021). Amortized
Causal Discovery: Learning to Infer Causal Graphs from Time-Series. Con-
ference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI).
[14] Purdue MINDS. (2025). Differentiable Constraint-Based Causal Discovery.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.22031.
[15] L. Michaelis and M. L. Menten, “Die Kinetik der Invertinwirkung,” Bio-
chemische Zeitschrift, vol. 49, pp. 333–369, 1913.
[16] Vargas, F., & Murphy, K. (2025). Langevin Dynamics for Scalable Causal
Structure Learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 26(44), 1102-
1125.
9
