FED-HARGPT: A Hybrid Centralized-Federated
Approach of a Transformer-based Architecture for
Human Context Recognition
Wandemberg Gibaut ∗Alexandre Osorio ∗Amparo Mu˜noz ∗
Sildolfo F. G. Neto ∗Fabio Grassiotto ∗
∗Hub de Inteligˆencia Artificial e Arquiteturas Cognitivas (H.IAAC)
Eldorado Research Institute, Campinas-SP, Brazil (e-mail:
{wandemberg.gibaut,alexandre.osorio,
fabio.grassiotto}@eldorado.org.br)
Abstract: The study explores a hybrid centralized-federated approach for Human Activity
Recognition (HAR) using a Transformer-based architecture. With the increasing ubiquity of
edge devices, such as smartphones and wearables, a significant amount of private data from
wearable and inertial sensors is generated, facilitating discreet monitoring of human activities,
including resting, sleeping, and walking. This research focuses on deploying HAR technologies
using mobile sensor data and leveraging Federated Learning within the Flower framework to
evaluate the training of a federated model derived from a centralized baseline. The experimental
results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed hybrid approach in improving the accuracy
and robustness of HAR models while preserving data privacy in a non-IID data scenario.
The federated learning setup demonstrated comparable performance to centralized models,
highlighting the potential of federated learning to strike a balance between data privacy and
model performance in real-world applications.
Keywords: Human Activity Recognition, Federated Learning, Machine Learning and Large
Language Models
1. INTRODUCTION
With the increasing ubiquity of edge devices, such as
smartphones and wearable technologies, there has been a
notable increase in the generation of private data from
wearable and inertial sensors, which enhance discreet
monitoring of human activities, including resting, sleep-
ing, walking, and stress level Cisco (2018). Integrating
private sensor data with advanced Artificial Intelligence
techniques is gaining considerable interest in consumer
products and industrial systems. This study focuses on
implementing Human Activity Recognition (HAR) tech-
nologies and techniques using mobile sensor data (such as
accelerometers and gyroscopes) and their application in
edge devices. Additionally, this work explores the utiliza-
tion of Federated Learning (FL) within the structure of
the Flower framework to assess the training of a federated
model derived from a centralized baseline. This evalua-
tion is carried out through an experiment using the Ex-
traSensory dataset. This non-IID dataset aims to validate
activity recognition in real-world conditions, thus moving
closer to practical applications in everyday environments
(Vaizman et al., 2017).
The contributions of this paper are as follows.
⋆Sponsor and financial support acknowledgment goes here. Paper
titles should be written in uppercase and lowercase letters, not all
uppercase.
• Presenting a lightweight, Transformer-based model
finetuned to an unrestricted HAR problem;
• Presenting a hybrid centralized-federated approach
to achieve a compromise between good performance,
data privacy, and personalization, in a scenario where
data is non-IID (Non-Independent and Identically
Distributed);
• Comparative analysis on an unrestricted dataset,
where data was collected without explicitly indicating
to participants how to use the devices.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section
2 presents related works. Section 3 presents the back-
ground theory involved. Section 4 presents the method-
ology and experiments. Section 5 presents the results and
the conclusion, and Section 6 presents a brief discussion.
2. RELATED WORKS
Recently, significant progress has been made in the field
of Human Activity Recognition, mainly using Multilayer
Perceptrons (MLP) and other architectures to identify ac-
tivities from mobile sensors. For example, the research by
Mantyjarvi et al. used waist-worn accelerometers to iden-
tify a specific set of body movements, combining wavelet
transform with principal component analysis and indepen-
dent component analysis to generate features Mantyjarvi
et al. (2001). An MLP classifier was used for classification,
achieving recognition accuracies between 83-90% for dif-
ferent human motions. Similarly, Kwapisz et al. used the
arXiv:2603.24601v1  [eess.SP]  13 Mar 2026
built-in accelerometer of a smartphone, mounted on a front
pant pocket, to recognize six body states, achieving up to
98% accuracy in certain activities, although performance
varied between activities (Kwapisz et al., 2011). The model
was trained on features derived from descriptive statistics
and the timing of peak values in sinusoidal waves related
to activities.
Additional advances in HAR have been demonstrated
through the integration of sensors from smartphones and
smartwatches. Some researchers explored the benefits of
sensor fusion, showing significant improvements in de-
tecting activities, including those associated with harmful
habits such as smoking (Guiry et al., 2014; Shoaib et al.,
2015). Guiry et al. evaluated five algorithms — C4.5,
CART, Naive Bayes, MLP, and Support Vector Machines
— reporting perfect accuracy across all instances. Shoaib
et al. assessed three algorithms —Support Vector Machine,
k-Nearest Neighbors, and Decision Tree — analyzing per-
formance across individual sensors and their combinations.
The challenge of generalizing from controlled experimental
conditions to real-life situations was highlighted by Kerr
et al., who noted that data collected under controlled set-
tings often performs poorly in natural environments (Kerr
et al. (2016)). Addressing similar concerns, Natarajan et
al. explored the issues arising from using data collected
in a laboratory to train classifiers that are then applied
in field settings, such as discrepancies in class and sen-
sor feature distributions and the difficulty in obtaining
reliable ground-truth labels in uncontrolled environments
Natarajan et al. (2016). Ermes et al. developed a system
that enables participants to self-report activities via a
personal digital assistant, selecting specific activities and
contexts (Ermes et al., 2008). In contrast, Choudhury et al.
developed a system aimed to practical context recognition
by being unobtrusive and fostering natural user behavior
(Choudhury et al., 2008). Khan et al. provided a smart-
phone and collected data from participants in their natural
environments for a month.
Recent implementations of Federated Learning within Mo-
bile Edge Computing (MEC) systems have also been ex-
plored to manage resources efficiently in distributed envi-
ronments. Nishio and Yonetani integrated federated aver-
aging in a practical MEC framework, allowing an operator
to manage heterogeneous client resources effectively Nishio
and Yonetani (2019). Wang et al. addressed the challenge
of resource limitation in MEC systems by implementing
various ML algorithms, including linear regression, SVM,
and CNN, using federated averaging to optimize both
computing and communication resources (Wang et al.,
2019). He et al. proposed FedGKT to mitigate computing
limitations on edge devices, where each device trains only
a portion of a full ResNet model to reduce computational
overhead (He et al., 2020).
Furthermore, Vaizman et al. (2017) introduced the Ex-
traSensory dataset — a rich, publicly available dataset for
HAR collected in unconstrained environments — and de-
veloped individual logistic regression classifiers to identify
self-reported contextual data. They also designed a unified
neural network model to tackle context identification as a
multi-label classification problem, modifying the objective
function to suit unconstrained data. This dataset and the
corresponding application were presented as open-source
resources, which facilitates further research and applica-
tion development. Besides the original paper, other works
used the ExtraSensory as the main dataset, e.g., Vaizman
et al. (2018) where the same research group presented
a unified neural network model to solve a multi-label
problem, Fazli et al. (2020), who applied a hierarchical
classification using a Deep Neural Network to categorize
six primary labels, enhancing the precision in identifying
activities like standing, running, or lying down. In addi-
tion, Gibaut et al. (2022) presented a hybrid approach in
which some clients are randomly selected to compose a
base model, while others are used in Federated Learning
rounds. Also, Osorio et al. (2024) presented a method using
Federated Transfer Learning to reduce the computational
cost of training the HAR model on smartphones for highly
imbalanced datasets like ExtraSensory.
Other works utilize Federated Learning strategies for HAR
problems. Sozinov et al. identified a trade-off between
communication cost and the complexity of a model and
proposed a method for erroneous client rejection (Sozinov
et al., 2018). Xiao et al. presented a novel Federated Learn-
ing approach for HAR using wearable devices (Xiao et al.,
2021). Cheng et al. proposed a prototype-based aggrega-
tion method for Federated Learning in HAR, which can
facilitate efficient communication among heterogeneous
clients (Cheng et al., 2023).
Regarding Transformers-based models to HAR, Ji et al.
use GPT-4 as a zero-shot learner for inference in structured
data (Ji et al., 2024). To the best of our knowledge, there
is no previous work where a Transformers-based model
was trained on an unbalanced, non-IID dataset for Human
Activity Recognition.
3. THEORICAL BACKGROUND
This section presents the theoretical aspects involved in
the present work. Each subsection discusses a specific
topic.
3.1 Human Activity Recognition
Human Activity Recognition (HAR) refers to the process
of identifying human actions or behaviors from observed
data input, typically derived from various sensors or video
recordings (Lara and Labrador, 2012). This multidisci-
plinary field intersects with areas such as computer vision,
signal processing, machine learning, and ubiquitous com-
puting, leveraging data-intensive approaches to discern
patterns indicative of different physical activities. The core
objective of HAR is to automatically detect and classify
a wide range of human movements or activities, such as
walking, running, sitting, or more complex sequences of
movements, through the analysis of sensor-generated data
or visual cues.
In the domain of machine learning, HAR systems employ
a variety of techniques ranging from traditional methods
such as Decision Trees, Support Vector Machines (SVM),
and Hidden Markov Models (HMM) to more contemporary
deep learning approaches, including Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)
(Straczkiewicz et al., 2021). These models are trained on
labeled datasets to recognize patterns and features associ-
ated with specific activities. Deep learning, in particular,
has shown remarkable success in HAR due to its ability
to learn complex, hierarchical features from raw data,
significantly increasing the accuracy of activity recognition
(Gu et al., 2021).
3.2 Transformers
Transformers are a groundbreaking class of models in
natural language processing (NLP) and beyond, which
have revolutionized the way machines understand and
generate human language. Introduced in 2017 (Vaswani
et al., 2017), Transformers eschew the sequential process-
ing paradigm of their predecessors, such as Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs) (Bengio et al., 1994) and Long
Short-Term Memory networks (LSTMs) Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber (1997), in favor of a mechanism called self-
attention. This innovation enables the model to weigh the
importance of different words within a sentence, regardless
of their positional distances from one another, thereby
capturing the context more effectively and efficiently.
The Transformer’s ability to handle sequences of variable
lengths and its proficiency in capturing long-range depen-
dencies within the data makes it particularly powerful for
tasks such as machine translation, text summarization,
sentiment analysis, and, more recently, in models like
GPT (Radford et al., 2018) for generative text tasks and
BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) for understanding context and
meaning in text. The adaptability and efficiency of this
architecture have paved the way for their application in
a wide range of tasks beyond NLP, including computer
vision and generative tasks (Hudson and Zitnick, 2021).
3.3 Federated Learning
Federated Learning is an innovative approach to machine
learning (ML) that enables the training of models on mul-
tiple decentralized devices without the need to exchange
local data (McMahan et al., 2017). This paradigm shifts
away from traditional ML methodologies, which typically
require vast amounts of data in a single location. De-
veloped to address growing concerns over privacy, data
security, and sovereignty, Federated Learning allows the
collaborative learning of a shared model while ensuring
that sensitive data remain on the user’s device, enhancing
privacy and data protection.
At the heart of Federated Learning is bringing the model
to the data, rather than the conventional approach of
bringing the data to the model. In this setup, a global
model is initially trained and distributed to all participants
(e.g. devices or local servers). Each participant then trains
the model on its local data to produce updated models
or gradients aggregated on a central server or through a
decentralized mechanism. This aggregated model is then
improved iteratively, leveraging insights obtained from
each participant’s data without actually accessing it.
Federated Learning presents numerous advantages, par-
ticularly in fields where data privacy is paramount, such
as healthcare, finance, and personal services (Yang et al.,
2019). For example, in healthcare, FL can enable the
development of predictive models for disease diagnosis by
learning from diverse datasets across multiple institutions
without sharing patient data (Antunes et al., 2022). This
protects patient privacy and allows more robust and gen-
eralized models by learning from a wide range of demo-
graphic and geographic data.
However, Federated Learning also poses challenges, includ-
ing managing communication overheads (Luping et al.,
2019), ensuring model convergence across diverse and po-
tentially unbalanced datasets (Servetnyk et al., 2020), and
safeguarding against malicious participants aiming to com-
promise the model or infer sensitive information. Despite
these hurdles, the potential of Federated Learning to fa-
cilitate privacy-preserving, collaborative machine learning
makes it a compelling area of research and development,
promising significant advancements in how AI systems are
trained and deployed in privacy-sensitive applications.
3.4 The ExtraSensory dataset
The ExtraSensory dataset includes sensor readings col-
lected from smartphones and smartwatches used by 60
participants engaged in various physical and everyday ac-
tivities across diverse locations (Vaizman et al., 2017). The
dataset captures information from a range of sensors, such
as accelerometer, gyroscope, magnetometer, GPS, audio,
location, and phone state indicators. Combining raw mea-
surements, statistical summaries, and pseudo-sensor data,
the dataset encompasses a total of 225 features.
Overall, the dataset comprises over 300,000 minutes of
real-world recordings, where participants used the devices
freely, rather than following predefined tasks in a con-
trolled environment. As a result, the distribution of activ-
ity labels is significantly imbalanced, as shown in Figure
1.
Figure 1. Logarithmic-scale histogram for one of the cross-
validation folds, showing the distribution of six of
the labels of the ExtraSensory dataset, illustrates the
significant imbalance in label distribution.
4. METHODOLOGY AND EXPERIMENTS
The primary objective of this research is to explore the
application of Federated Learning techniques to Human
Activity Recognition using a Transformer-based model.
This task is inherently complex due to the large peculiarity
in human body, motion and phone use and demands a
high degree of privacy. We sought to develop a model to
recognize all 51 ExtraSensory labels. Some categories are
mutually exclusive, like ’running’ and ’lying down’, but
most can be simultaneously selected, so the classification
problem is multi-label. The dataset was divided into train-
ing (including validation) and testing sets with an 80-20
split, maintaining a proportional representation of these
activities to address the inherent class imbalance.
Similar to our previous work, cross-validation was em-
ployed to evaluate the model’s generalization, wherein the
dataset was distributed among various FL clients (Gibaut
et al., 2022). Specifically, the data from 60 subjects was
segmented into five folds. Each fold comprised data from
a distinct group of 12 subjects, designated as clients,
while the aggregate data from the remaining 48 subjects
were utilized to train a base model. This first training
establishes a baseline from which the FL system fine-tunes
the global model. The initial weights of the global model
are set with the values derived from this centralized pre-
training phase, which involves a comprehensive subset of
48 individuals distinct from those in each client-specific
fold. This strategy is expected to decrease the number of
training epochs required to adapt the model in a federated
context, a critical consideration for subsequent deployment
on edge computing devices with constrained processing
power and memory, such as Android smartphones.
4.1 FED-HARGPT
In the present study, the model architecture employed is
derived from the GPT-2 framework (Radford et al., 2019),
albeit with some tailored modifications to suit the specific
requirements of this research. The choice of GPT-2 as
the base model is predicated on its relatively lightweight
structure compared to more recent large language mod-
els (LLMs). This characteristic of GPT-2 facilitates the
deployment of multiple model instances within a single
traditional device — AMD Ryzen Threadripper 3960X
24-Core Processor with two RTX 3090 GPUs, of which
only one was used —, enabling efficient Federated Learning
processes across distributed computing environments.
One of the adaptations made to the original GPT-2
architecture to better align with this work’s objectives
involved removing the embedding layer that typically
serves as the entry point for input data in the standard
GPT-2 model. In its place, a trainable linear layer was
introduced, providing a more flexible mechanism for initial
data processing that is adaptable to the nuances of the
input data specific to this study, such as being continuous
by nature and cannot be fully represented in a discrete
space.
Further enhancements to the model include adding two
distinct layers atop the base GPT-2 structure. The first
addition is another linear layer, designed to refine the
transformations applied by earlier layers and prepare the
data for final classification tasks. Following this, an extra
layer featuring a ’tanh’ activation function was incor-
porated. The design of this layer includes a number of
neurons that correspond directly to the number of labels
in the multilabel classification problem addressed by this
research, allowing for precise output mapping according to
the defined categories.
Integrating these modifications into the GPT-2 architec-
ture enables the tailored model to effectively handle the
specific requirements of the multilabel classification task
within a Federated Learning context. By adapting the
model in this manner, it is better equipped to process and
classify the diverse and distributed data typically encoun-
tered in Federated Learning scenarios, thereby enhancing
the overall efficacy and applicability in practical settings.
4.2 Centralized Training
The initial training phase involved a usual, centralized
Machine Learning process using aggregated data from
48 participants. The chosen model for this task was the
already explained custom model, referred to in this work
as FED-HARGPT (an acronym for Federated Human
Activity Recognition GPT). A Random Search technique
was employed to optimize the hyperparameters. We ran for
400 epochs, a batch size of 64, and the parameters adjusted
during this process included:
• number of transformer layers: 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 or 12
• hidden size: 48, 96, 192, 384 or 768
• number of positions: 32, 64, 128 or 256
• learning rate: log uniform distribution ranging from
1e-5 to 1e-1
The primary metric targeted for optimization was Bal-
anced Accuracy, a suitable measure for datasets with sig-
nificant class imbalance, as it avoids misleading perfor-
mance assessments that can arise from underrepresented
classes. Balanced Accuracy is calculated as follows:
BalancedAccuracy = 0.5 ∗(specificity + sensitivity)
where
specificity = tn/(tn + fp)
sensitivity = tp/(tp + fn)
and tp, tn, fp and fn stand for True Positive, True
Negative, False Positive and False Negative, respectively.
The optimal model found by the hyperparameters opti-
mization were:
• hidden size: 384
• n positions: 128
• transformers layers: 4
• learning rate: 1e-5
For each folder, we trained a model with the learning rate
increased to 4e-5 and the number of epochs to 20000. This
number of epochs was chosen considering the grokking
effect on model training (Power et al., 2022).
4.3 Federated Training
The clients were configured using the Flower Federated
Learning framework Beutel et al. (2020), initiating with
five models that had previously undergone training. This
setup involved individual threads on a Linux system, as
previously mentioned. Each client independently executed
training and testing rounds using their local datasets
in this federated system. After each round, the clients
communicated their model weights to the FL server, which
operates locally on the same system.
The Flower framework offers flexibility to adjust various
parameters of the Federated Learning strategy. In this par-
ticular setup, the FedAvg Strategy (McMahan et al., 2017)
was employed with specific configurations to optimize the
learning process. We set both fit and evaluation fractions
to 1.0, minimum available clients to 12 (all of them), batch
size of 64, local epochs to 2000, and number of rounds to
4.
The Federated Learning protocol was configured to exe-
cute over five distinct phases, consistent with the cross-
validation scheme previously described. This configura-
tion utilized twelve threads, each hosting an instance of
a Flower client. During each round of cross-validation,
clients initiated the process by loading the base model
and then proceeded to train using their designated local
datasets. This method facilitated a thorough evaluation of
the model performance, using varied data subsets to rigor-
ously assess its generalization and efficacy in the context
of Federated Learning.
5. RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
The first conclusion we found in our analysis was that,
consistent with our previous work (Gibaut et al., 2022),
there is a low correlation between the number of samples
available and the balanced accuracy of each client. Also,
as seen in Table 1, there was a considerable difference in
metrics between the best and the worst fold (around 7.8%
in Balanced Accuracy), lying between 0.718 and 0.779.
Table 1. Folds’ statistics outlining differences
in BA between the best and the worst fold
fold
mean balanced accuracy (BA)
0
0.754
1
0.728
2
0.718
3
0.759
4
0.779
Figure 2 shows each fold’s boxplot of the Balanced Ac-
curacy. The distribution shows that, despite most of the
clients’ BA being between 0.71 and 0.82 (the first and third
quartile of all folds are in this range), the individual result
can be as low as 0.63 or as high as 0.90. We argue that
this phenomenon is closely related both with the diver-
sity of collected data and the nature of some activities:
clients that have a higher diversity of labels will produce
data better suitable for the classification task, while some
activities are inherently challenging to infer from mobile
sensor data.
Figure 3 shows the distribution of the Balanced Accuracy
considering all five folds. The shape resembles a Gaussian
distribution, with most of the curve being better than the
established state-of-the-art (SotA) for the dataset being
used. Again, we argue that discrepancies between the
clients are, as mentioned before, due to the diversity of
data between them and the nature of each activity.
Table 2 compares the metrics of the present work and
those found in publications using the same dataset for
all 51 labels (Vaizman et al., 2018). Numbers in paren-
thesis represent the number of neurons in hidden layers;
that is, (8) would represent one hidden layer with eight
neurons, while (16, 16) represents two hidden layers with
16 neurons each. The models of the present work achieved
a mean performance slightly below SotA, but almost a
Figure 2. Box plot for each fold in the Federated Learning
process. Note that the dispersion of the clients’ BAs
has a relatively stable median, but the size of the
quartiles and tails of the distributions may present
very different values.
Figure 3. Histogram of Balanced Accuracy results consid-
ering all folds. The blue curve is a Kernel Density
Estimate (KDE) that helps visualize the data dis-
tribution. Most clients’ BAs lie between 0.7 and 0.8,
indicating some consistency
third of clients (19 of 60) had better or equal performance
than what was established, and the best client achieved
outstanding results.
The experiments show that using a Transformer-based
architecture, fine-tuning some data in a centralized way,
and then further fine-tuning with Federated Learning can
lead to good results for HAR problems. This approach
leverages the benefits of pre-trained language models while
maintaining data privacy and personalization. As a possi-
ble future work, Federated Learning strategies other than
FedAvg could be tested, such as FedPer, which performs
better in non-IID data scenarios (Arivazhagan et al.,
2019).
6. DISCUSSION
The experimental results from our study highlight the
robustness and efficacy of the hybrid centralized-federated
Table 2. Comparison between our approach
and state-of-the-art
Classifier
Balanced Accuracy
MLP(8) Vaizman et al. (2018)
0.772
MLP(16,16) Vaizman et al. (2018)
0.773
FED-HARGPT (mean)
0.747
FED-HARGPT (best folder mean)
0.779
FED-HARGPT (best client)
0.909
approach in Human Activity Recognition using a Transformer-
based architecture. The Balanced Accuracy metrics demon-
strate consistent performance across various data folds,
with most accuracy values clustering around 0.75. This
consistency affirms the reliability of our model in di-
verse scenarios and underscores the potential of Federated
Learning to maintain high performance while ensuring
data privacy. This capability is exciting in healthcare and
finance, among others, where privacy concerns are high.
Our study opens paths for future work that addresses the
scalability and efficiency of Federated Learning processes
using Language Models. Techniques such as hierarchi-
cal Federated Learning and differential privacy can fur-
ther optimize communication overhead and ensure robust
model convergence, even with increasing data and device
volumes. Expanding the scope of HAR by incorporating
diverse sensor data and advanced machine learning tech-
niques could yield better performance and broader appli-
cability. The promising results from our study pave the
way for leveraging hybrid centralized-federated approaches
in various domains, such as smart cities and personalized
health monitoring, ensuring data privacy while provid-
ing accurate, context-aware insights. This research sets a
strong foundation for future innovations and applications
in Federated Learning and AI-driven systems. Also, the
use of a small LLM indicates the potential of such models
to show good performance on complex problems like HAR
on non-IID data.
In conclusion, our study demonstrates that a hybrid
centralized-federated approach using a Transformer-based
architecture is feasible and highly effective for Human Ac-
tivity Recognition in non-IID data scenarios. The balanced
performance across different data folds, combined with
data privacy and security advantages, highlights the poten-
tial of Federated Learning in practical applications. As we
move forward, continuous improvements and adaptations
of this approach will be essential to address challenges like
data diversity, better model personalization, and the full
harnessing of its benefits across diverse domains.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank the support of the
Hub for Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive Architec-
tures, a project founded by PPI-Softex/MCTI by grant
01245.003479/2024-10 through the Brazilian Federal Gov-
ernment.
REFERENCES
Antunes, R.S., Andr´e da Costa, C., K¨uderle, A., Yari,
I.A., and Eskofier, B. (2022).
Federated learning for
healthcare: Systematic review and architecture pro-
posal.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and
Technology (TIST), 13(4), 1–23.
Arivazhagan, M.G., Aggarwal, V., Singh, A.K., and
Choudhary, S. (2019). Federated learning with person-
alization layers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.00818.
Bengio, Y., Simard, P., and Frasconi, P. (1994). Learning
long-term dependencies with gradient descent is diffi-
cult. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 5(2), 157–
166.
Beutel, D.J., Topal, T., Mathur, A., Qiu, X., Parcollet,
T., de Gusm˜ao, P.P., and Lane, N.D. (2020). Flower: A
friendly federated learning research framework. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2007.14390.
Cheng, D., Zhang, L., Bu, C., Wang, X., Wu, H., and Song,
A. (2023).
Protohar: Prototype guided personalized
federated learning for human activity recognition. IEEE
Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 27(8),
3900–3911.
Choudhury, T., Borriello, G., Consolvo, S., Haehnel, D.,
Harrison, B., Hemingway, B., Hightower, J., Pedja, P.,
Koscher, K., LaMarca, A., et al. (2008).
The mobile
sensing platform: An embedded activity recognition
system. IEEE Pervasive Computing, 7(2), 32–41.
Cisco
(2018).
Cisco
annual
internet
report
(2018–2023). URL https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/
solutions/collateral/executive-perspectives/
annual-internet-report/
white-paper-c11-741490.pdf.
Last
checked
on
Apr 25, 2022.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K.
(2018). Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional trans-
formers for language understanding.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.04805.
Ermes, M., P¨arkk¨a, J., M¨antyj¨arvi, J., and Korhonen, I.
(2008).
Detection of daily activities and sports with
wearable sensors in controlled and uncontrolled condi-
tions. IEEE transactions on information technology in
biomedicine, 12(1), 20–26.
Fazli, M., Kowsari, K., Gharavi, E., Barnes, L., and Do-
ryab, A. (2020). Hhar-net: hierarchical human activity
recognition using neural networks.
In International
Conference on Intelligent Human Computer Interaction,
48–58. Springer.
Gibaut, W., Osorio, A., Munoz, A., Neto, S.F., Miranda,
D., Santos, F., Scarassati, M., and Grassiotto, F. (2022).
Toward a federated model for human context recog-
nition on edge devices.
In Congresso Brasileiro de
Autom´atica-CBA, volume 3.
Gu, F., Chung, M.H., Chignell, M., Valaee, S., Zhou, B.,
and Liu, X. (2021). A survey on deep learning for human
activity recognition. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR),
54(8), 1–34.
Guiry, J.J., Van de Ven, P., and Nelson, J. (2014). Multi-
sensor fusion for enhanced contextual awareness of ev-
eryday activities with ubiquitous devices.
Sensors,
14(3), 5687–5701.
He, C., Annavaram, M., and Avestimehr, S. (2020). Group
knowledge transfer: Federated learning of large cnns at
the edge. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 33, 14068–14080.
Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long short-
term memory. Neural computation, 9(8), 1735–1780.
Hudson, D.A. and Zitnick, L. (2021). Generative adversar-
ial transformers. In International conference on machine
learning, 4487–4499. PMLR.
Ji, S., Zheng, X., and Wu, C. (2024). Hargpt: Are llms
zero-shot human activity recognizers?
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.02727.
Kerr, J., Patterson, R.E., Ellis, K., Godbole, S., Johnson,
E., Lanckriet, G., and Staudenmayer, J. (2016). Objec-
tive assessment of physical activity: classifiers for public
health.
Medicine and science in sports and exercise,
48(5), 951.
Kwapisz, J.R., Weiss, G.M., and Moore, S.A. (2011).
Activity recognition using cell phone accelerometers.
ACM SigKDD Explorations Newsletter, 12(2), 74–82.
Lara, O.D. and Labrador, M.A. (2012). A survey on hu-
man activity recognition using wearable sensors. IEEE
communications surveys & tutorials, 15(3), 1192–1209.
Luping, W., Wei, W., and Bo, L. (2019). Cmfl: Mitigating
communication overhead for federated learning.
In
2019 IEEE 39th international conference on distributed
computing systems (ICDCS), 954–964. IEEE.
Mantyjarvi, J., Himberg, J., and Seppanen, T. (2001).
Recognizing human motion with multiple acceleration
sensors. In 2001 ieee international conference on sys-
tems, man and cybernetics. e-systems and e-man for cy-
bernetics in cyberspace (cat. no. 01ch37236), volume 2,
747–752. IEEE.
McMahan, B., Moore, E., Ramage, D., Hampson, S., and
y Arcas, B.A. (2017). Communication-efficient learning
of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial
intelligence and statistics, 1273–1282. PMLR.
Natarajan, A., Angarita, G., Gaiser, E., Malison, R., Gane-
san, D., and Marlin, B.M. (2016). Domain adaptation
methods for improving lab-to-field generalization of co-
caine detection using wearable ecg. In Proceedings of the
2016 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive
and Ubiquitous Computing, 875–885.
Nishio, T. and Yonetani, R. (2019).
Client selection
for federated learning with heterogeneous resources in
mobile edge.
In ICC 2019-2019 IEEE international
conference on communications (ICC), 1–7. IEEE.
Osorio, A.F., Grassiotto, F., Moraes, S.A., Mu˜noz, A.,
Neto, S.F.G., and Gibaut, W. (2024). Transfer learning
for human activity recognition in federated learning on
android smartphones with highly imbalanced datasets.
In 2024 IEEE Symposium on Computers and Commu-
nications (ISCC), 1–4. IEEE.
Power, A., Burda, Y., Edwards, H., Babuschkin, I., and
Misra, V. (2022).
Grokking: Generalization beyond
overfitting on small algorithmic datasets. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.02177.
Radford, A., Narasimhan, K., Salimans, T., Sutskever, I.,
et al. (2018).
Improving language understanding by
generative pre-training.
Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D.,
Sutskever, I., et al. (2019). Language models are unsu-
pervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8), 9.
Servetnyk, M., Fung, C.C., and Han, Z. (2020).
Unsu-
pervised federated learning for unbalanced data.
In
GLOBECOM 2020-2020 IEEE Global Communications
Conference, 1–6. IEEE.
Shoaib, M., Bosch, S., Scholten, H., Havinga, P.J., and
Incel, O.D. (2015).
Towards detection of bad habits
by fusing smartphone and smartwatch sensors. In 2015
IEEE international conference on pervasive computing
and communication workshops (PerCom Workshops),
591–596. IEEE.
Sozinov,
K.,
Vlassov,
V.,
and
Girdzijauskas,
S.
(2018).
Human activity recognition using federated
learning.
In
2018
IEEE
Intl
Conf
on
Parallel
&
Distributed
Processing
with
Applications,
Ubiquitous
Computing
&
Communications,
Big
Data
&
Cloud
Computing,
Social
Computing
&
Networking, Sustainable Computing & Communications
(ISPA/IUCC/BDCloud/SocialCom/SustainCom),
1103–1111. IEEE.
Straczkiewicz, M., James, P., and Onnela, J.P. (2021). A
systematic review of smartphone-based human activity
recognition methods for health research. NPJ Digital
Medicine, 4(1), 148.
Vaizman, Y., Ellis, K., and Lanckriet, G. (2017). Recog-
nizing detailed human context in the wild from smart-
phones and smartwatches. IEEE pervasive computing,
16(4), 62–74.
Vaizman, Y., Weibel, N., and Lanckriet, G. (2018). Con-
text recognition in-the-wild: Unified model for multi-
modal sensors and multi-label classification.
Proceed-
ings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and
Ubiquitous Technologies, 1(4), 1–22.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones,
L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser,  L., and Polosukhin, I. (2017).
Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, 30.
Wang, S., Tuor, T., Salonidis, T., Leung, K.K., Makaya,
C., He, T., and Chan, K. (2019). Adaptive federated
learning in resource constrained edge computing sys-
tems.
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communi-
cations, 37(6), 1205–1221.
Xiao, Z., Xu, X., Xing, H., Song, F., Wang, X., and
Zhao, B. (2021).
A federated learning system with
enhanced feature extraction for human activity recog-
nition. Knowledge-Based Systems, 229, 107338.
Yang, Q., Liu, Y., Chen, T., and Tong, Y. (2019). Feder-
ated machine learning: Concept and applications. ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology
(TIST), 10(2), 1–19.
